Charles Owen Distinguished Professor Emeritus, Illinois Institute of Technology  Abstract Problems induced by continuing population growth and its pressure on resources and environment have reached a stage where serious concern must be given to the processes of decision making being used by governmental and institutional leaders. Science thinking is frequently unheard or unheeded and design thinking is not engaged at all.
Design thinking, as a complement to science thinking, embodies a wide range of creative characteristics as well as a number of other special qualities of distinct value to decision makers. In advisory roles, properly prepared design professionals could make substantial contributions to a process now dominated by political and economic views.
This paper examines the nature of design thinking as it differs from other ways of thinking. A model for comparing ﬁelds is introduced and a number of characteristics of creative individuals in general and designers in particular are presented.
Preparing designers for participation in policy planning will be a challenge for design education. Meeting the challenge will require new understanding, an extended range of design tools, and concerted support from the design professions to demonstrate the value of design thinking to decision making at the highest levels.

Introduction The handiwork of humankind is ﬁnally beginning to impress itself on the global environment and on us, its inhabitants. This should inspire us as design professionals to reconsider what we do, who our clients are, and where we can best offer our expertise. In particular, the decision processes of high-level decision makers are in need of serious overhaul.
It is news to no one that current rates of resource consumption cannot keep up with population growth as it exists. World population is virtually certain by 2050 to increase by half again from its present 6.46 billion—with all that means for our dwindling resources. Coupled with that, it is at last clear that global warming is fact, and its growing control over Earth’s climate and weather systems will unpredictably complicate problems already made serious by population pressures.
The road ahead indeed seems dark, but there is hope.
A profusion of new technologies is emerging, many with potential to alleviate or even eliminate the problems induced by population growth. As Jared Diamond points  This paper, was adapted from Design thinking. What it is. Why it is different. Where it has value., a keynote speech presened at: the International Conference on Design Research and Education for the Future, conducted in conjunction with: the Gwangju Design Biennale 2005, Light into Life Sponsored by: ICSID; ICOGRADA; IFI; and, from the Republic of Korea: Government Information Agency; Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; Ministry of National Defense; Ministry of Government Administration and Home Affairs; Ministry of Culture and Tourism; Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy; Ministry of Information and Communication; Ministry of Construction and Transportation; Korea Customs Service; The Korean Culture and Arts Foundation; Korea Institute of Design Promotions; Korea Foundation of Design Associations; and the Korea Society of Design Studies. 18 October - 1 November, 2005  Charles Owen Charles L. Owen is Distinguished Professor Emeritus at the Institute of Design,one of the six academic units of the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) in Chicago. There, Mr.
Owen conducts research and teaches semiannually in the MDes, MDM and PhD Design graduate programs.
He joined the IIT faculty in 1965 following studies for degrees in chemistry and product design, additional studies in city planning and computer science, and four years as an ofﬁcer in the U.S. Navy. Since then, he has worked in the ﬁelds of product design, design planning, computer-supported design, design methodology and design theory—directing the Product Design program for 20 years, founding and directing the Design Processes Laboratory for 14 years, publishing the Design Processes Newsletter for 10 years, and teaching, conducting research and consulting. He has acted as advisor to several universities in the U.S. and abroad and has served or now serves on the advisory boards of the journals: Visible Language (U.S.), Design Recherche (France), Design Studies(UK), ARCOS(Brazil), Asia Design Journal (Korea), Journal of Design Excellence (Malaysia) and the Wiley International book series on design.
Professor Owen has written a number of computer programs for business and institutional applications, has published widely (over 125 articles, papers, books and book chapters), has served on international juries, and has been an invited lecturer at over 200 institutions in the U.S. and abroad. Among many awards his students have won are two Grand Prizes in the Japan Design Foundation’s International Design Competition, the Grand Prize in Sony Corporation’s International Design Vision Competition, and the 1991 Grand Award in the Environmental Technology category of Popular Science Magazine’s ‘The Year’s 100 Greatest Achievements in Science and Technology’. In 1990, he was the recipient of the American Center for Design’s Education Award for his contributions to design history, theory and practice. In 1995 he was honored at IIT with recognition as Distinguished Professor of Design. In 1997, he was elected Honorary Member of the Japanese Society for the Science of Design, the ﬁrst in its 44 year history. In 1999 the Institute of Design honored his work with the establishment of an endowed Chair in his name, and he was named one of 36 ‘IIT People of the Millennium’ by the university for his contributions.

out1, technologically complex societies autocatalyze technological growth, and the resulting development accelerates over time. We are, in effect, unintentionally creating the highly sophisticated tools that may prevent the destruction initiated with earlier created tools.
Key to the use or misuse of these technologies are the decision processes employed by those in power. History has shown that political decisions do not always favor the best interests of all, and when critical factors include information not easily understood by political decision makers, that information may be disregarded or not even considered. My argument in recent papers2 is that the stakes are now too high for critical information to be unheard or ignored.

‘Design thinking is in many ways the obverse of scientiﬁc thinking.’  Science advisors have long been included among highlevel governmental advisory staffs. How their advice is valued, however, has varied with the problem context, and political interests have almost always trumped scientiﬁc advice. More than ever before, scientiﬁc advice requires serious consideration. And another kind of thinking deserves equal attention.
Design thinking is in many ways the obverse of scientiﬁc thinking. Where the scientist sifts facts to discover patterns and insights, the designer invents new patterns and concepts to address facts and possibilities. In a world with growing problems that desperately need understanding and insight, there is also great need for ideas that can blend that understanding and insight in creative new solutions. Implicit in this notion is the belief that design thinking can make special, valuable contributions to decision making. In this paper, I will explore the nature of that kind of thinking, its value, and the differences between design thinking and other ways of thinking.

Finders, Makers and Applied Creativity A sensitive observer might notice an interesting thing about creative people. They tend to work in two different ways (Figure 1).
Those who work in the ﬁrst way, might best be called ‘ﬁnders’. They exercise their creativity through discovery.
Finders are driven to understand, to ﬁnd explanations for phenomena not well understood. In professional life, they  usually become scientists or scholars and are responsible for much of our progress in understanding ourselves and our surroundings.
Those who work in the second way are ‘makers’, equally creative, but in a different way. They demonstrate their cre ativity through invention. Makers are driven to synthesize what they know in new constructions, arrangements, patterns, compositions and concepts that bring tangible, fresh expressions of what can be. They become architects, engineers, artists—designers —and are responsible for the built environment in which we live and work.

Design Thinking vs Other Kinds of Thinking Given the fundamental process differences between how ﬁnders and makers think and work, it is reasonable to  Figure 2 Map of Fields: Context and Process Differentiate  believe that other factors might similarly reveal differences among professional ﬁelds and, therefore, help to deﬁne the nature of design thinking. One such factor is the content with which a ﬁeld works. A conceptual ‘map’ can be drawn to use both content and process factors (Figure 2).
Two axes deﬁne the map. Separating the map into left and right halves is an Analytic/Synthetic axis that classiﬁes ﬁelds by process—the way they work. Fields on the left side of the axis are more concerned with ‘ﬁnding’ or discovering; ﬁelds on the right with ‘making’ and inventing.
A Symbolic/Real axis divides the map into halves vertically, according to content or realm of activity. Fields in the upper half of the map are more concerned with the abstract, symbolic world and the institutions, policies and language tools that enable people to manipulate information, communicate and live together. Fields in the lower half are concerned with the real world and the artifacts and systems necessary for managing the physical environment.
A sampling of ﬁelds illustrates how the map differentiates (Figure 3). The ﬁve chosen are highly recognizable  its analyses. There are elements of science, however, that are synthetic in process (as, for example, in materials science or organic chemistry), and science can deal directly with unabstracted, real content, particularly in the natural sciences.
Law, as a generalized ﬁeld, is located higher on the map, concerned extensively with the symbolic content of institutions, policies and social relationships. It is also positioned more to the right, as a signiﬁcant portion of its disciplines are concerned with the creation of laws and the instruments of social contract. Medicine, in contrast, is sharply lower on the content axis, vitally concerned with the real problems of human health. On the process scale, it is strongly analytic; diagnostic processes are a primary focus of medicine. Art is high on the content axis, strongly symbolic, and almost evenly divided on the process scale, still more synthetic than analytic, but very much involved with interpretation of the human condition.
Design in this mapping is highly synthetic and strongly concerned with real world subject matter. Because disci with well deﬁned disciplines and well understood differences. Every ﬁeld has component elements in each of the four quadrants. What distinguishes one ﬁeld from another is the degree to which a ﬁeld positions its ‘center of gravity’ away from the center into the quadrants and the direction that positioning takes. In Figure 3, ﬁelds close to the center are more ‘generalized’ with respect to the axes; ﬁelds away from the center are more ‘specialized’.
Science is farthest to the left as a ﬁeld that is heavily analytic in its use of process. Its content is also more symbolic than real in that subject matter is usually abstracted in  plines of design deal with communications and symbolism, design has a symbolic component, and because design requires analysis to perform synthesis, there is an analytic component—but design is a ﬁeld relatively specialized, and specialized nearly oppositely to science.
For almost any ﬁeld, a case can be made for movement to the left or right based on the variety of detailed interests the ﬁeld subsumes. Positioning is very subjective, but absolute positioning is not what is important in this kind  of mapping. Relative positioning is. It provides a means for comparing multi-ﬁeld relationships with regard to the two important dimensions of content and process.
Fields, of course, are just the tops of hierarchies, and the hierarchical nature of their subject matter opens a door to the examination of relationships among elements at ﬁner levels of detail (Figure 4). Mechanical engineering, a subject at the discipline level, is nicely centered between the analytic and synthetic domains, but that is only true when it is considered as a whole. Engineering science, one of its sub-disciplines, would be located much farther to the left; engineering design would be on the right. Decomposing mathematics produces, among other subspecialties, applied mathematics, which is concerned more generally with the real domain than is mathematics, the parent discipline. The complexity of most ﬁelds affords opportunities for such leveling and sharpening through hierarchical examination. Composition is a leveling process, lessening distinctions and moving more inclusive concepts, such as ﬁelds, toward the center of the map; decomposition is a sharpening process, revealing differences and dispersing more tightly deﬁned disciplines and sub-disciplines into the quadrants.
Movements of ﬁelds and disciplines through time and culture can also be tracked. Through much of the last two thousand years, for example, western sculptors rendered realistic subjects for their clients, commemorating individuals and events. Since the turn of the last century, cultural trends in the arts have moved sculpture up and to the left on the map. Architecture in this century has moved up and down on the map as various movements have shift e Together, they well cover areas of decision making  ed the discipline’s focus of interest between symbolic and functional goals.
A ﬁeld’s choice of subject matter and procedure distinguishes it from others. Design, as a ﬁeld, clearly occupies a special place on the map, more complementary to science than any other ﬁeld in that, coupled with science, it ﬁlls out the space most completely (Figure 5). The source of the  Knowledge is generated and accumulated through action  G Judging results: evaluating works to build knowledge  complementation lies in deeply rooted differences in ways of thinking. To understand the differences, it is useful to look at how knowledge is built and used in a ﬁeld.

Foundations In any ﬁeld, knowledge is generated and accumulated through action: the model is doing something and evaluating the results. In Figure 6, the process is shown as a cycle in which knowledge is used to produce works, and  G Knowledge is generated by inquiry and application  G Realms of theory and practice are seldom balanced in a ﬁeld  works are evaluated to build knowledge. Knowledge using and knowledge building are both structured processes controlled by channels that contain and direct the production and evaluation processes.
These channels are the systems of conventions and rules under which a ﬁeld and its disciplines operate. They embody the values and integrate the principles and measures that have evolved as ‘ways of doing and knowing’ as the ﬁeld has matured. They may borrow from or emulate aspects of other ﬁelds’ channels, but over time, they become custom tailored to a ﬁeld as products of its evolution.
The general model can be extended to one that reﬂects the dual nature of ﬁelds and disciplines suggested by the analytic/ Need/ synthetic dimension of the Map of Fields. Goal In Figure 7, this is done with an addition of realms of theory and practice within which paradigms of inquiry and application operate3.
Underlying knowledge building and knowledge using in any ﬁeld are deep foundation layers that direct and inform higher levels all the way to the level of overt procedure. In order from most fundamental to most directly operational, these can be expressed as needs or goals, values and measures. Qualities that a ﬁeld exhibits on the surface and differences among ﬁelds can be best understood by examining these foundations.
Figure 8 presents the foundation model diagrammatically. At the most fundamental level, a driving force—a need/ goal that must be satisﬁed—generates a ﬁeld. For any welldeﬁned ﬁeld this usually can be encapsulated in a word, the purpose for which the ﬁeld evolved. For disciplines, as the focused specialties of a ﬁeld, it is frequently a need felt strongly and seen purely enough to enlist individuals in a career.
From a need or goal, values emerge to identify the qualities important to fulﬁlling the need. The work of the ﬁeld is evaluated in terms of these values. Both needs and values exist at an abstract level, providing reference and foundation against which procedures at an operational level can be tested.
The third and fourth layers of the model take values into the domain of action. The third layer, still relatively abstract, is concerned with the interpretation of values into measures that guide the creation of instruments to manage  the processes of knowledge using and building. Measures are conveniently conceptualized as scales. Because they include expressions for the description of quality at high and low ends, and can have intermediate descriptions as well, they form an ideal bridge from single-word notions of value to evaluative dimensions. Most typically, measurement scales are bipolar with a ‘good’ side and a ‘bad’ side (e.g., true/false, right/wrong, works/doesn’t work, etc.), but  they need not be. Triangular and higher dimension scales (essentially maps) also work, but are less readily applied.
Further, scales need not be continuous or even multistepped. True/false is perfectly valid as a binary yes/no proposition. And they need not be linear; whether steps are uniform or progressively larger or smaller is not at issue— the issue is resolution in the measurement of value.
The value frameworks created by measures guide the formation of operational methods for producing and judging work. Methods, in turn, combine into the familiar working procedures and processes that encode the knowledge of the discipline operationally for paradigms of both application and inquiry.
Figure 9 uses the model to compare design with the four previously introduced ﬁelds. The measures suggested are examples, by no means a complete set.
Science is driven by the need for Understanding. To achieve this goal, it values Correctness, in the sense that theories can be evaluated for whether they are correct, as best can be determined with current data. It also values Thoroughness because understanding must be thorough to remove uncertainty. Testability is valued because closure  demands that theories be tested and determined to be cor- of good citizenship. Measures such as Just/Unjust, Right/ rect or incorrect. These values (and others) ﬁnd expression Wrong, Complete/Incomplete, Appropriate/Inappropriate in measures that expand the essence of the value into tools and Fair/Unfair draw out the evaluations appropriate to that can be incorporated directly or indirectly in frame- the ﬁeld.

Measures a True/False a Correct/Incorrect a Complete/ Incomplete  a Fresh/Stale a Exciting/Boring a Just/Unjust a Right/Wrong a Appropriate/ Inappropriate  a Fair/Unfair a Works/Doesn’t Work a Fits/Doesn’t Fit a Elegant/Inelegant a Better/Worse a Sustainable/ Unsustainable  works, methods and procedures. Measures such as True/ False, Correct/Incorrect, Complete/Incomplete, and Provable/Unprovable exemplify these.
Art, quite different in this kind of analysis, derives from the need for Expression. Values such as Insightfulness, Novelty and Stimulation highlight important aspects of expression as it is regarded today, and measures such as Thought provoking/Banal, Fresh/Stale and Exciting/ Boring particularize these for the criteria to be used in the production and criticism of art.
Law strives for Justice. Its values, Fairness, Thoroughness and Appropriateness, are concerns important to writing the law and ensuring that it is properly used in support  Medicine shares much with science, but has its own need for being in maintaining, promoting and regenerating Health. Among its values, Correctness is critical for diagnoses and procedures, and Effectiveness, a value strongly shared with design, is relevant when something is better than nothing. Measures include Correct/Incorrect, Works/Doesn’t work and Better/Worse.
Design exists because of the need for Form. The form giver, in the broadest use of the term, creates order.
Because the world of design is the world of the artiﬁcial, the values of design tend to be ones associated with human needs and environmental needs created by or resulting from human actions. Cultural Fit is associated with aesthetic issues; Appropriateness targets the wide range of  physiological, cognitive, social and cultural human factors; and Effectiveness gauges functionality and utility. For Cultural Fit, good measures are Fresh/Stale, Fits/Doesn’t Fit and Elegant/Inelegant; for Appropriateness, Appropriate/ Inappropriate and Works/Doesn’t Work (from the human factors perspective) are helpful. From a utility perspective, Works/Doesn’t Work, Sustainable/Unsustainable and Better/Worse measure Effectiveness.

‘…a combination of science thinking and design thinking is better than either alone as a source of advice.’  Seen through the differences in underlying values, differences among ﬁelds become clearer and more understandable. As a case in point, a major difference between science and design lies in the difference between Correctness and Effectiveness as important measures of success.
Correct/Incorrect (or True/False) is appropriate for a ﬁeld in which there can only be one ‘true’ answer or correct explanation for an observed phenomenon. Better/Worse is appropriate for a ﬁeld in which multiple solutions can be equally successful because the conditions for judgment are culturally based.
From all this, it is easier to see why a combination of science thinking and design thinking is better than either alone as a source of advice. Either is valuable, but together they bring the best of skeptical inquiry into balance with imaginative application. Both are well served by creative thinking. In preparation for a wider consideration of design thinking, therefore, it is time to look at the general characteristics of the creative thinker.

Characteristics of Creative Thinking Despite great interest and considerable speculation over many years, the nature of creativity, what makes one person creative and another not, and the creative process itself, remain elusive. Nevertheless, a number of characteristics have been identiﬁed and these can be useful in contemplating the nature of creative thinking and, in particular, creative design thinking as it is and as we would like it to be.

Fabun’s List In a special issue of Kaiser Aluminum News some years ago, editor Don Fabun assembled characteristics of the creative  individual culled from the observations of a number of thoughtful writers4. While they are not all-inclusive, they provide a good start for assembling a catalog: e Sensitivity. A propensity for greater awareness which makes a person more readily attuned to the subtleties of various sensations and impressions. Eric Fromm4 writes, ‘Creativity is the ability to see (or be aware) and to respond’.
e Questioning attitude. An inquisitiveness, probably imprinted in early home training that encourages seeking new and original answers.
e Broad education. An approach to learning instilled from a liberal education that puts a premium on questions rather than answers and rewards curiosity rather than rote learning and conformity.
e Asymmetrical thinking. The ability to ﬁnd an original kind of order in disorder as opposed to symmetrical thinking that balances everything out in some logical way. ‘The creative personality is unique in that during the initial stages he prefers the chaotic and disorderly and tends to reject what has already been systematized’. Ralph J.
Hallman4 e Personal courage. A disregard for failure derived from a concern, not for what others think, but what one thinks of oneself. ‘They seemed to be less afraid of what other people would say or demand or laugh at ... Perhaps more important, however, was their lack of fear of their own insides, of their own impulses, emotions, thoughts’.
Abraham Maslow4 e Sustained curiosity. A capacity for childlike wonder carried into adult life that generates a style of endless questioning, even of the most personally cherished ideas. Eric Fromm4: ‘Children still have the capacity to be puzzled...
But once they are through the process of education, most people lose the capacity of wondering, of being surprised.
They feel that they ought to know everything, and hence that it is a sign of ignorance to be surprised or puzzled by anything’.
e Time control. Instead of being bound by time, deadlines and schedules, creative individuals use time as a resource—morning, noon and night—years, decades— whatever it takes, unbound by the clock.
e Dedication. The unswerving desire to do something, whatever it may be and whatever the obstacles to doing it.

e Willingness to work. The willingness to continue to pursue a project endlessly, in working hours and so-called free hours, over whatever time might be required. Roger Sessions4 said, ‘Inspiration, then, is the impulse which sets creation in movement; it is also the energy which keeps it going’.

Additions from Arieti In 1976, psychiatrist Silvano Arieti thoroughly reviewed what was known then about creativity5. From his study, several additional characteristics can be included: e Fluency of thinking. Word ﬂuency, the ability to produce words containing speciﬁed letters or combinations of letters; associational ﬂuency, the ability to produce synonyms for given words; expressional ﬂuency, the ability to juxtapose words to meet the requirements of sentence structure, and ideational ﬂuency, the ability to produce ideas to fulﬁll certain requirements— to offer solutions to problems.
e Flexibility. The ability to abandon old ways of thinking and initiate different directions.
e Originality. The ability to produce uncommon responses and unconventional associations.
e Redeﬁnition. The ability to reorganize what we know or see in new ways.
e Elaboration. The capacity to use two or more abilities for the construction of a more complex object.
e Tolerance for ambiguit y. T he capacit y to enter tain conﬂicting concepts for periods of time without the need to resolve uncertainties.

e Fantasy and reality. Breaking away from the present without losing touch with the past; ﬁnding originality in which novelty is rooted in reality.
e Extroversion and introversion. Seeing and hearing people, exchanging ideas, and getting to know other persons’ work to extend interaction; working alone to fully explore and master abstract concepts.
e Humility and pride. Humility in the awareness of those who worked before, the element of luck involved with achievement, and the relative unimportance of past achievements in comparison with a focus on future projects; pride in the self-assurance associated with accomplishment.
e Masculinity and femininity. Psychological androgyny enabling the best traits of bold, assertive masculinity to be combined with the best traits of sensitive, aware femininity.
e Traditional conservatism and rebellious iconoclasm. Being able to understand and appreciate a cultural domain and its rules, while at the same time being willing to take risks to break with its traditions.
e Passion and objectivity. Passion in the attachment and dedication to the cause or work; objectivity in the ability to stand apart, detached, to evaluate quality impartially.
e Suf fering and enjoyment. The heightened highs and lows that come with intense involvement and sensitivity, both to observed quality and to what others think.

Csikszentmihalyi notes that these conﬂicting traits are difﬁcult to ﬁnd in the same person, but ‘the novelty that survives to change a domain is usually the work of someCsikszentmihalyi’s Polarities one who can operate at both ends of these polarities—and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, an anthropologist at the Uni- that is the kind of person we call creative’.
versity of Chicago, sees the creative individual in terms of Many of these characteristics, especially among those ‘pairs of apparently antithetical traits that are often both listed by Csikszentmihalyi, are not qualities to be taught.
present in such individuals and integrated with each other At best these are natural personality traits that can be recin a dialectical tension’6. ognized where they exist or noted in their absence, but e Generalized libidinal energy and restraint. ‘Without eros, many of the others can be developed or encouraged, and it would be difﬁcult to take life on with vigor; without this should be done overtly.
restraint, the energy could easily dissipate.’ e Convergent and divergent thinking. Divergent thinking to Characteristics of Design Thinking generate ideas; convergent thinking to tell a good one Creativity is of major importance to design thinking, as it from a bad one. is to science thinking and thinking in any ﬁeld. But as is e Playfulness and discipline—or irresponsibility and responsi- true for each ﬁeld, characteristics other than creativity are bility. Exploring ideas widely and lightly, but surmounting obstacles and bringing ideas to completion with doggedness, endurance and perseverance.

also important. From personal experience, I would nomi- cally followed by some designers: the design of adaptive nate for design thinking the following characteristics and products able to ﬁt their users’ needs uniquely. Design ways of working: thinking today has accepted that concept, approaching e Conditioned inventiveness. Creative thinking for design- problems with the view that, where possible, solutions ers is directed toward inventing. Designers tend to be should be adaptive—in production, to ﬁt the needs of more interested in the ‘what’ questions than the ‘whys’ users uniquely; throughout their use, to ﬁt users’ evolvof interest to the scientist. Design creativity, thus, com- ing needs.
plements scientiﬁc creativity. Design creativity, howev- e Predisposition toward multifunctionality. Solutions to prober, must cover more than just invention. Design brings lems need not be monofunctional. Designers routinely to invention a concern that what is produced not only be look for multiple dividends from solutions to problems.
inventive, but be so within the frameworks of human- This would seem to be an obvious way to proceed, but it centered and environment-centered measures governing is not so. In a recent issue of Popular Science magazine7, the designer’s efforts. the cover story was six new technologies to stop global e Human-centered focus. Science and, to a slightly lesser warming. The story reported proposals made by the sciextent, technology have few built-in governors. That is ence community at a special invited meeting with White to say, as in the arts, exploration proceeds where discov- House ofﬁcials. All six science proposals were serious eries direct. Design, on the other hand, is client-directed. proposals for macroengineering projects. Five of the Design thinking must continually consider how what is six proposed single-minded means for relieving global being created will respond to the clients’ needs. warming—at considerable cost, and with no additione Environment-centered concern. In recent years, design al beneﬁts. The sixth, as an extension of a technology thinking has acquired a second, omnipresent and meta- already used for increasing natural gas production, had level client: the environment. Present-day thinking puts that beneﬁt, but no other. In contrast, the three macro environmental interests at a level with human interests design projects proposed in the Institute of Design’s as primary constraints on the design process. Sustain- prize winning Project Phoenix (also reported in Popular able design is one very noticeable result, The ultimate Science 14 years earlier) all had major economic beneﬁts value of human- and environment-centeredness is a in addition to their global warming beneﬁts8. Design guarantee that the best interests of humankind and thinking keeps the big picture in mind while focusing environment will be considered in any project. on speciﬁcs.
e Ability to visualize. All designers work visually. Design- e Systemic Vision. Design thinking is holistic. In the ers can visualize ideas in a range of media, bringing a last forty years, roughly since the computer began to common view to concepts otherwise imagined unique- inﬂuence design thinking, designers have moved to conly by everyone in a discussion. Designers can reveal the sidering problems more broadly. Modern design treats whole elephant that the blind men can only partially and problems as system problems with opportunities for sysimperfectly conceive. temic solutions involving mixes of hardware, software, e Tempered optimism. It is difﬁcult to work—and especial- procedures, policies, organizational concepts and whatly to work creatively—in a pessimistic, critical mood. ever else is necessary to create a holistic solution.
Designers are taught to recognize this and to establish e View of the Generalist. Common wisdom today holds that optimistic and proactive ways of working. Pronounced the trend of expertise is to greater and greater specialmood swings are not unusual among creative individ- ization and, therefore, success will come more readiuals, but designers learn to control these to level out ly to those who choose to specialize early and plan their both lows and highs in the interests of professional- training accordingly. Design thinking, to the contrary, ism—designers must be able to turn on enthusiasm on is highly generalist in preparation and execution. In a demand. world of specialists, there is real need for those who can e Bias for adaptivity. In recent years, the emergence of reach across disciplines to communicate and who can adaptive processes in manufacturing and information bring diverse experts together in coordinated effort. For technologies has greatly reinforced a practice histori- inventive creativity, the wider the reach of the knowledge  base, the more likely the creative inspiration. A designer is a specialist in the process of design, but a generalist in as wide a range of content as possible.
e Ability to use language as a tool. Language is usually thought of as means for communication. For design thinking, it is also a tool. Visual language is used diagrammatically to abstract concepts, reveal and explain patterns, and simplify complex phenomena to their fundamental essences. Mathematical language is used to explore ‘what if’ questions where feasibility may be established by approximation—by calculations not exact, but close enough to support an idea or change a line of reasoning. Verbal language is used in description where explanation goes hand in hand with the creative process, forcing invention where detail is lacking and expressing relationships not obvious visually.
e Af ﬁnity for teamwork. Because designers work for clients, it is natural that good interpersonal skills become part of the professional set of tools they develop. An additional impetus toward teamwork has been a movement in the professions over the last forty years toward team-based design, spurred by developments in industry. Design thinking today is highly inﬂuenced by this, and designers routinely work closely with other designers and experts from other ﬁelds. On multi-discipline teams, designers are a highly valuable asset because of their characteristic abilities to generalize, communicate across disciplines, work systematically with qualitative information, and visualize concepts.
e Facility for avoiding the necessity of choice. The job of the decision maker is to choose among alternative proposals, usually the products of different problem-solving approaches. Design thinking takes the view that making that choice is a last resort. Before moving to choice-making, the designer looks for ways to ‘have your cake and eat it too’—a seeming paradox (exactly what you cannot do, as pointed out in the old English proverb). The optimistic, adaptive designer, however, searches the competing alternatives for their essential characteristics and ﬁnds ways to reformulate them in a new conﬁguration. When this process is successful, the result is a solution that avoids the decision and combines the best of both possible choices.
e Self-governing practicality. Design is a ﬁeld in which inventiveness is prized. In very few ﬁelds is there the freedom to dream expected in design. The best design  thinkers understand this and learn to govern ﬂights of fantasy with a latent sense of the practical. The ﬂight is to the outer reaches of what can be conceived; the tether is to ways that the conceivable might be realized. This is embedded in a style of thinking that explores freely in the foreground, while maintaining in the background a realistic appraisal of costs that can be met and functionality that can be effected.
e Ability to work systematically with qualitative information.
As design research has matured and design methodology progressed, design processes with component methods and tools have been developed and reﬁned. As one such process, Structured Planning9 contains a tool-kit of methods for a complete range of planning tasks covering ways to ﬁnd information, gain insights from it, organize it optimally for conceptualization, evaluate results and communicate a plan to the public and follow-on teams in the development process. Methods such as this are qualitative information handling techniques applicable to many kinds of conceptual problems where complex, system solutions are desirable. They are also usable by anyone working on a planning team, enabling systematic aspects of design thinking to be made accessible to all.

Design Education to Serve New Clients The characteristics enumerated above are not those normally listed in a catalog for a design course. These are special ways of design thinking, almost implicit in the nature of the design process and usually taught tacitly in today’s design education programs. For most of the characteristics, this works because design education programs are several years in length and directed toward a career in design.
There is ample opportunity to acquire the skills and nuances of design thinking, and a predisposition to do so exists on the part of students because they have chosen to become designers. For some of the characteristics, though, particularly those that have developed more recently, tacit assimilation is not enough, and more progressive schools can be expected to institute formal courses to teach them.
We can expect problems to appear, moreover, when the context is changed. Teaching design thinking, formally or tacitly, is one thing when the context is a traditional design career in industry or a consulting ofﬁce. It will be quite another when the context is institutional or governmental policy planning. And our problem is just that: to train a new kind of student for that new context. To train students  for roles as policy design synthesis advisors, it will be necessary to create a new kind of design program. Some of the factors that will need to be considered are: G How long should the program be? Can it be taught in one, two or three years? Should it be full-time or parttime—or either? It is unlikely that a long program will be acceptable. Just as business schools have crafted one and two year programs for executives seeking MBA degrees, a program for policy design synthesis will in all likelihood have to be relatively condensed and, perhaps, packaged in unusual time blocks and delivery means accessible to potential students already working in design or planning ﬁelds.
G Who are the best candidates for the program? Should candidates be recruited from institutional/governmental positions? Should experienced senior designers be recruited? It is not clear yet whether planners turned design thinkers or designers turned planning practitioners would be better. The correlated question whether senior designers or policy staff members would beneﬁt more than young professionals in either ﬁeld is also open. Perhaps, analogous programs for policy planning will be instructive.
G What levels of experience and schooling should be required for entrance to the program? Must candidates have one or more design degrees? What kind of experience is valuable? Should special experience be required? Some level of experience will almost certainly be necessary and training in both design and planning must be undertaken, either prior to entry or during the period of education. Experience can be built up through internships within the program, and varying degrees of foundation education can be offered as additional required studies for deﬁcient candidates who otherwise would be highly qualiﬁed.
e What is the ideal mix of design tools and thinking and tools and thinking from other ﬁelds to best prepare students for their working environment? What tools from the available design inventory are suitable? What modiﬁcations should be sought? What tools from other ﬁelds could be reﬁned for this new use? What wholly new tools would be desirable? Design research will have some new ﬁelds to probe. Tools will have to cover at least three sectors of policy design synthesis. First, tools for design advisors to work with other planning advisors. These will probably be information handling tools, much like  Structured Planning, where all can work together under guidance by someone trained in using the tools. Second, tools for design advisors to work for other planning advisors. These will be tools that require more design expertise, but whose use is for crystallizing concepts for the planning group. Third, tools for design advisors to work away from other planning advisors. These will probably be tools for specialized design simulation and modeling work whose results will be important for the planning process, but whose workings require more specialized knowledge and time use than is reasonable for team members working directly on the planning problem.
G What mix of academic and internship experience should be planned? What form should the educational process take? Should elements of the program be on-site at an institutional location? Packaging of the program will be crucial to its success. If it achieves a high level of attention at executive levels, many otherwise highly effective, but costly, forms of education may become possible.
Very low student-to-teacher ratios complemented with learning settings optimally suited to the education process are an example. The mix of experiences and forms of involvement should be planned for maximum effect in minimum time to appeal to a potential student population (and clients desiring to hire them) in position to expect—and sponsor—the best. How should successful completion of the program be judged? Course completion? Thesis or dissertation? License? Should examiners include internship advisors from relevant institution?  The opportunity may be here for new forms of evaluation.
Design thinking is almost never evaluated well by testing, and almost all design is taught by ‘project-oriented’ learning methods. Final research work as typiﬁed by theses and dissertations is probably also inappropriate for the kind of program that most likely will evolve for policy design synthesis. A project-like demonstration of proﬁciency that could take a range of possible forms might be an answer.
Such a demonstration could involve other students and have evaluators from both the university and the institution where the student is serving his or her internship.
The task of creating a Policy Design Synthesis program will be difﬁcult. Governmental and institutional organizations must be convinced that policy design synthesis is a valuable addition to the advisory skills they rely upon. For that, our professional design societies can carry the cam paign. New tools will have to be created to bring the skills  of design thinking to bear on policy problems. For that,  our design research institutions and university programs  can lead the way. The problem is greater than the capabili ties of any single university. Cooperation will be essential—  to convince leaders, to create tools, and to train students  in numbers signiﬁcant to have impact—while there is  The problems induced by a growing population are becom ing major with virtual certainty that their number and seri ousness will increase. Global warming, as one of the latest  manifestations, adds levels of complication and uncertain ty almost impossible to anticipate. Decision making at the  policy level must avail itself of the best advice it can ﬁnd to  at once confront disasters on increasingly grander scales,  and beneﬁt from the emergence of extremely powerful  To interpret the problems and possibilities of impending  changes, science thinking must be solicited and heard. To  explore and conceptualize ways to proceed, design think ing must receive equal attention. Among the many kinds  of advice available, the creative voices of discovery and  invention as embodied in the insights of scientists and the  Design thinking, less well known than science thinking,  has characteristics of great value to teams dealing with  complex, ill-formed problems. Together, the characteristics  of design and science thinking form a set of complemen tary thought processes able to add considerable strength to  Providing design thinking in an advisory capacity to  governmental and institutional leaders will require an evo lution in design education, design research and design pro fessional activities. For design education, new programs  must be designed that bring the best of design thinking  into the new context of policy planning. New content will  be necessary; new processes must be developed and taught;  and new ways of working will have to be learned. It will be  29 Seven New Fellows of the Design Research Society  ICM Report: 30 BRAZIL: 7th P&D Brazilian Conference on Research and Development in Design Daniela Büchler  Design Conference Calendar: 31 Upcoming Events Worldwide Artemis Yagou  Calls for Papers: 6 Emarging Trends in Design Research 2007 IASDR conference, Hong Kong  Shaping the Future? 9th International Conference on Engineering and Product Design Ed.
Newcastle upon Tyne UK  32 Livenarch Contextualism in Architecture Trabzon Turkey  DRQ is the journal of the Design Research Society. Every member of DRS receives a subscription to DRQ as a member beneﬁt. The journal is distributed four times a year. It goes direct to each member as an email attachment. Each issue contains timely news, information, and listings of events that are only available to members for the six months following publication.
Following the six-month embargo, DRQ becomes an open-access journal for the larger scientiﬁc and scholarly community.

DRQ publishes peer-reviewed scholarly and scientiﬁc articles of durable importance to the ﬁeld of design research.
We are committed to open access publishing. As the journal of a not-for-proﬁt scholarly and scientiﬁc society, we distribute ﬁrst to members. Following a six-month embargo, the journal is made available for free distribution through the public area of the DRS web site as well as through libraries and other organizations. We also provide authors with reprints of their articles.

A high quality peer review process, an outstanding editorial board, and a unique combination of multiple distribution channels makes Design Research Quarterly an excellent venue for publishing research. We welcome contributions from all interested authors.