Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy of Management Review.

This content downloaded on Thu, 21 Feb 2013 10:28:55 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions  For a field of social science to have usefulness, it must have a conceptual frameworkthat explains and predicts a set of empirical phenomena not explained or predicted by conceptual frameworks already in existence in other fields. To date, the phenomenon of entrepreneurship has lacked such a conceptual framework. Rather than explaining and predicting a unique set of empirical phenomena, entrepreneurship has become a broad label under which a hodgepodge of research is housed. What appears to constitute entrepreneurship research today is some aspect of the setting (e.g., small businesses or new firms),rather than a unique conceptual domain. As a result, many people have had trouble identifyingthe distinctivecontributionof the field to the broader domain of business studies, undermining the field's legitimacy. Researchers in other fields ask why entrepreneurshipresearch is necessary if it does not explain or predict empirical phenomena beyond what is known fromwork in other fields.
Moreover, the lack of a conceptual framework has precluded the development of an understanding ofmany importantphenomena not adequately explained by other fields.
One example of this problem is the focus in the entrepreneurship literature on the relative  We acknowledge the helpful comments of Ed Roberts on an earlier draftofthis note. The authors contributedequally and are listed alphabetically.

performance of individuals or firmsin the contextof small or new businesses. Since strategic management scholars examine the differences in and sustainability ofrelative performancebetween competitive firms,this approach is not unique (Venkataraman, 1997).Moreover,the approach does not provide an adequate test of entrepreneurship, since entrepreneurship is concerned with the discovery and exploitation of profitable opportunities. A performance advantage over otherfirmsis not a sufficientmeasure of entrepreneurial performance,because a performance advantage may be insufficientto compensate forthe opportunitycost of other alternatives,a liquiditypremiumfortimeand capital, and a premium for uncertainty bearing.
Therefore,although a conceptual frameworkto explain and predict relative performance between firmsis useful to strategic management, it is not sufficientforentrepreneurship.
We attemptan integratingframeworkforthe entrepreneurship field in the formof this note.
We believe that this frameworkwill help entrepreneurship researchers recognize the relationship among the multitude of necessary, but not sufficient,factors that compose entrepreneurship, and therebyadvance the quality ofempirical and theoretical workin the field. By providing a framework that both sheds light on unexplained phenomena and enhances the quality of research, we seek to enhance the field's legitimacy and prevent its marginaliza tion as only "a research setting" or "teaching ploitation of opportunities; and the set of indiapplication." viduals who discover, evaluate, and exploit The note proceeds as follows. First,we define them.
the domain ofthe field. Second, we explain why Although the phenomenon of entrepreneurorganizational researchers should study entre- ship provides research questions formany difpreneurship. Third, we describe why entrepre- ferent scholarly fields,1 organization scholars neurial opportunities exist and why some peo- are fundamentally concerned with three sets of ple, and not others, discover and exploit those research questions about entrepreneurship: opportunities. Fourth,we consider the different (1) why, when, and how opportunities for the modes of exploitation of entrepreneurial oppor- creation of goods and services come into existunities. Finally, we conclude with briefreflec- tence; (2) why,when, and how some people and tions on the potential value of the framework not others discover and exploit these opportunipresented here. ties; and (3) why,when, and how differentmodes of action are used to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities.
Before reviewing existing research to answer DEFINITIONOF ENTREPRENEURSHIP these questions, we provide several caveats about our approach. First,we take a disequilibrium approach, which differsfromequilibrium approaches in economics (Khilstrom& Laffont, 1979) and social psychology (McClelland, 1961).
In equilibrium models, entrepreneurialopportunities either do not exist or are assumed to be randomly distributedacross the population. Because people in equilibrium models cannot discover opportunities that differin value from those discovered by others, who becomes an entrepreneurin these models depends solely on the attributes of people. For example, in Khilstrom and Laffont's (1979) equilibrium model, entrepreneursare people who preferuncertainty.
Although we believe that some dimensions of equilibrium models are useful forunderstanding entrepreneurship,we argue that these models are necessarily incomplete. Entrepreneurial behavior is transitory(Carroll & Mosakowski, 1987).Moreover,estimates ofthe number ofpeople who engage in entrepreneurial behavior range from20 percent of the population (Reynolds & White, 1997)to over 50 percent (Aldrich& Zimmer,1986).Since a large and diverse group of people engage in the transitoryprocess of entrepreneurship,itis improbable thatentrepreneurship can be explained solely by referenceto a characteristicofcertain people independent of the situations in which they find themselves.
Therefore,when we argue thatsome people and  Perhaps the largest obstacle in creating a conceptual framework for the entrepreneurship field has been its definition.To date, most researchers have defined the field solely in terms of who the entrepreneuris and what he or she does (Venkataraman, 1997). The problem with this approach is that entrepreneurshipinvolves the nexus of two phenomena: the presence of lucrative opportunities and the presence of enterprisingindividuals (Venkataraman, 1997).By defining the field in terms of the individual alone, entrepreneurship researchers have generated incomplete definitions that do not withstand the scrutiny of other scholars (Gartner, 1988).
The definitionof an entrepreneuras a person who establishes a new organization is an example ofthis problem. Because this definitiondoes not include consideration ofthe variation in the quality of opportunities that differentpeople identify,it leads researchers to neglect to measure opportunities. Consequently, empirical support (or lack of support) for attributes that differentiateentrepreneursfromothermembers of society is oftenquestionable, because these attributes confound the influence of opportunities and individuals.
In contrastto previous research, we define the field ofentrepreneurshipas the scholarly examination of how, by whom, and with what effects opportunities to create future goods and services are discovered, evaluated, and exploited (Venkataraman, 1997). Consequently, the field involves the study of sources of opportunities; the processes of discovery, evaluation, and ex 'For example, economists are interested in the distribution of entrepreneurial talent across productive and unproductive activities (Baumol, 1996).

not others engage in entrepreneurial behavior, we are describing the tendency of certain people to respond to the situational cues of opportunities-not a stable characteristic that differentiates some people from others across all situations.2 Second, we argue that entrepreneurshipdoes not require, but can include, the creation ofnew organizations. As Amit, Glosten, and Mueller (1993) and Casson (1982) explain, entrepreneurship can also occur withinan existing organization. Moreover, opportunities can be sold to otherindividuals or to existing organizations. In this note we do not examine the creation ofnew organizations per se but,rather,referinterested readers to excellent reviews on firmcreation in organizational ecology (Aldrich, 1990; Singh & Lumsden, 1990), economics (Caves, 1998; Geroski, 1995),and organizational theory(Gartner, 1985; Katz & Gartner, 1988; Low & MacMilIaxn,1988).3 Third,our frameworkcomplements sociological and economic work in which researchers have examined the population-level factorsthat influence firmcreation. Stinchcombe (1965)identifiedsocietal factorsthat enhance incentives to organize and organizing ability. Aldrich (1990) and Singh and Lumsden (1990) have provided reviews offactorsenhancing firmfoundingsand have described the effects of such factors as environmental carrying capacity, interpopulation processes, and institutional factors. Similarly,Baumol (1996)has related the institutional environment to the supply of people who are willing to create firms.
Although these other frameworks are valuable to entrepreneurshipscholars, they involve a set of issues differentfromthose with which we are concerned. Our frameworkdiffersfrom these in that (1) we focus on the existence, discovery,and exploitation of opportunities; (2) we examine the influence ofindividuals and opportunities,ratherthan environmental antecedents and consequences; and (3) we consider a framework broader than firmcreation.

2 We also argue thatentrepreneurshipcan be undertaken by a single individual or a set ofpeople who undertake the steps of the process collectively or independently.
3Many researchers argue that entrepreneurship occurs for reasons other than for profit(see Roberts, 1991, for a review), but we discuss only for-profietntrepreneurship.

Fourth,our framework also complements research on the process offirmcreation (e.g., Gartner, 1985; Katz & Gartner, 1988; Katz, 1993). Explaining this process is important,but research on itinvolves examining a differentset ofissues fromthose we explore. Firm creation process researchers examine resource mobilization,firm organizing, and market making, starting with the assumption that opportunities exist, have been discovered, and will be exploited through the creation of new firms. Since we lack the space to review both the processes of entrepreneurship through market mechanisms and throughfirmcreation, we limitour discussion to the conditions under which entrepreneurial opportunitiesare exploited throughfirmsand markets, and we referreaders to these otherframeworks for information on the process of firm creation.

Many scholars ask, either implicitlyor explicitly,whyanyone should studyentrepreneurship.
Data are difficultto obtain, theoryis underdeveloped, and many findings to date are the same as those obtained in other areas of business. In response, we offerthree reasons for studying the topic. First, much technical information is ultimately embodied in products and services (Arrow,1962),and entrepreneurshipis a mechanism by which society converts technical informationinto these products and services.
Second, entrepreneurship is a mechanism throughwhich temporal and spatial inefficiencies in an economy are discovered and mitigated (Kirzner, 1997). Finally, of the different sources ofchange in a capitalist society,Schumpeter (1934)isolated entrepreneuriallydriven innovation in products and processes as the crucial engine driving the change process.
Therefore,the absence ofentrepreneurshipfrom our collective theories ofmarkets,firms,organizations, and change makes our understanding of the business landscape incomplete. As Baumol eloquently remarks, the study of business without an understanding of entrepreneurship is like the study of Shakespeare in which "the Prince of Denmark has been expunged fromthe discussion of Hamlet" (1989: 66).

THE EXISTENCE, DISCOVERY, AND EXPLOITATION OF ENTREPRENEURIAL OPPORTUNITIES  To have entrepreneurship,you must firsthave entrepreneurial opportunities. Entrepreneurial opportunities are those situations in which new goods, services, raw materials, and organizing methods can be introduced and sold at greater than their cost of production (Casson, 1982).Although recognition of entrepreneurial opportunities is a subjective process, the opportunities themselves are objective phenomena that are not known to all parties at all times. For example, the discovery of the telephone created new opportunitiesforcommunication,whetheror not people discovered those opportunities.
Entrepreneurial opportunities differfromthe larger set of all opportunities forprofit,particularly opportunities to enhance the efficiencyof existing goods, services, raw materials, and organizing methods, because the formerrequire the discovery of new means-ends relationships, whereas the latter involve optimization within existing means-ends frameworks(Kirzner,1997).
Because the range of options and the consequences of exploiting new things are unknown, entrepreneurial decisions cannot be made through an optimization process in which mechanical calculations are made in response to a given set of alternatives (Baumol, 1993).
Entrepreneurial opportunities come in a variety of forms.Although the focus in most prior research has been on opportunities in product markets (Venkataraman, 1997), opportunities also exist in factormarkets,as in the case ofthe discovery of new materials (Schumpeter, 1934).
Moreover, within product market entrepreneurship, Drucker(1985)has described threedifferent categories of opportunities: (1) the creation of new information,as occurs withthe inventionof new technologies; (2) the exploitation of market inefficienciesthatresult frominformationasymmetry,as occurs across time and geography; and (3) the reaction to shiftsin the relative costs and benefitsofalternative uses forresources, as occurs with political, regulatory, or demographic changes.
Previous researchers have argued that entrepreneurial opportunities exist primarily because differentmembers of society have different beliefs about the relative value ofresources,  given the potential to transformthem into a differentstate (Kirzner,1997).Because people possess differentbeliefs (because ofa luckyhunch, superior intuition,or private information),they make differentconjectures about the price at which markets should clear or about what possible new marketscould be created in the future.
When buyers and sellers have differentbeliefs about the value of resources, both today and in the future,goods and services can sell above or below theirmarginal cost ofproduction(Schumpeter,1934).An entrepreneurialdiscovery occurs when someone makes the conjecture that a set of resources is not put to its "best use" (i.e., the resources are priced "too low," given a belief about the price at which the output fromtheir combination could be sold in another location, at another time, or in another form).If the conjecture is acted upon and is correct,the individual will earn an entrepreneurial profit.If the conjecture is acted upon and is incorrect,the individual will incur an entrepreneurial loss (Casson, 1982).
Entrepreneurship requires that people hold differentbeliefs about the value ofresources for two reasons. First, entrepreneurship involves joint production, where several differentresources have to be broughttogethertocreate the new product or service. For the entrepreneurto obtain controlover these resources in a way that makes the opportunityprofitable,his or her conjecture about the accuracy of resource prices must differfromthose of resource owners and other potential entrepreneurs (Casson, 1982). If resource owners had the same conjectures as the entrepreneur,they would seek to appropriate the profitfromthe opportunityby pricingthe resources so that the entrepreneur's profitapproached zero. Therefore,forentrepreneurship to occur, the resource owners must not share completely the entrepreneur's conjectures. Second, if all people (potential entrepreneurs)possessed the same entrepreneurial conjectures, they would compete to capture the same entrepreneurial profit,dividing it to the point thatthe incentive to pursue the opportunitywas eliminated (Schumpeter, 1934).
But why should people possess differentbeliefs about the prices at which markets should clear? Two answers have been offered.First,as Kirzner(1973) has observed, the process of discovery in a market setting requires the participants to guess each other'sexpectations about a  wide variety of things. People make decisions on the basis of hunches, intuition,heuristics, and accurate and inaccurate information,causing their decisions to be incorrectsome of the time.Since decisions are notalways correct,this process leads to "errors"that create shortages, surpluses, and misallocated resources. An individual alert to the presence of an "error"may buy resources where prices are "too low," recombine them,and sell the outputs where prices are "too high." Second, as Schumpeter (1934)explained, economies operate in a constant state of disequilibrium.Technological, political, social, regulatory, and other types of change offera continuous supply of new informationabout differentways to use resources toenhance wealth. Bymaking it possible to transform resources into a more valuable form,the new informationalters the value ofresources and, therefore,the resources' properequilibrium price. Because informationis imperfectlydistributed, all economic actors do not receive new informationat the same time.
Consequently, some people obtain information before others about resources lying fallow, new discoveries being made, or new markets opening up. If economic actors obtain new information before others,they can purchase resources at below their equilibrium value and earn an entrepreneurial profit by recombining the resources and then selling them (Schumpeter, 1934).
The informationalsources ofopportunitymay be easier to see in the case of new technology, but they need not be restrictedto technological developments. For example, the production of the movie Titanic generated new information about who was a desirable teen idol. An entrepreneur could respond to this new information by acting on the conjecture that posters of Leonardo DeCaprio would sell forgreater than their cost of production.
Because entrepreneurial opportunities depend on asymmetriesofinformationand beliefs, eventually, entrepreneurial opportunities become cost inefficientto pursue. First,the opportunityto earn entrepreneurial profitwill provide an incentive to many economic actors. As opportunities are exploited, informationdiffuses to other members of society who can imitate the innovator and appropriate some of the innovator'sentrepreneurialprofitA.lthoughthe entryof imitating entrepreneurs initially may validate  the opportunityand increase overall demand, competition eventually begins to dominate (Hannan & Freeman, 1984). When the entryof additional entrepreneurs reaches a rate at which the benefits fromnew entrants exceeds the costs, the incentive forpeople to pursue the opportunityis reduced, because the entrepreneurial profitbecomes divided among more and more actors (Schumpeter, 1934).
Second, the exploitation of opportunityprovides informationto resource providers about the value ofthe resources thattheypossess and leads themto raise resource prices over time,in order to capture some of the entrepreneur's profitforthemselves (Kirzner,1997).In short,the diffusionof informationand learning about the accuracy of decisions over time,combined with the lure of profit,will reduce the incentive for people to pursue any given opportunity.
The duration of any given opportunity depends on a variety of factors. The provision of monopoly rights,as occurs with patent protection or an exclusive contract,increases the duration. Similarly, the slowness of information diffusion or the lags in the timeliness with which others recognize information also increase the duration,particularlyiftimeprovides reinforcingadvantages, such as occur with the adoption of technical standards or learning curves. Finally, the "inability of others (due to various isolating mechanisms) to imitate, substitute,trade foror acquire the rare resources required to drive down the surplus" (Venkataraman, 1997: 133) increases the duration.

Although an opportunityfor entrepreneurial profitmight exist, an individual can earn this profitonly ifhe or she recognizes thatthe opportunityexists and has value. Given thatan asymmetryof beliefs is a precondition forthe existence of entrepreneurial opportunities, all opportunities must not be obvious to everyone all ofthe time (Hayek, 1945).Atany point in time, only some subset ofthe population will discover a given opportunity(Kirzner,1973).
Why do some people and not others discover particular entrepreneurial opportunities? Although the null hypothesis is blind luck, research has suggested two broad categories of factorsthatinfluence the probabilitythatparticular people will discover particular opportuni ties: (1) the possession of the prior information necessary to identifyan opportunityand (2) the cognitive properties necessary to value it.
Informationcorridors.Human beings all possess differentstocks of information,and these stocksofinformationinfluencetheirabilityto recognize particularopportunities.Stocksofinformation create mental schemas, which provide a frameworkfor recognizing new information.To recognize an opportunitya,n entrepreneurhas to have priorinformationthatis complementarywith the new informationw,hich triggersan entrepreneurial conjecture(Kaish & Gilad, 1987).This prior informationmightbe about user needs (Von Hippel, 1986) or specific aspects of the production function(Bruderl,Preisendorfer&, Ziegler, 1992).
The informationnecessary to recognize any given opportunity is not widely distributed across the population because ofthe specialization of informationin society (Hayek, 1945).People specialize in informationbecause specialized information is more useful than general informationfor most activities (Becker & Murphy, 1992).As a result,no two people share all of the same informationat the same time. Rather, informationabout underutilized resources, new technology,unsated demand, and political and regulatory shiftsis distributed according to the idiosyncratic life circumstances of each person in the population (Venkataraman, 1997).
The development of the Internet provides a useful example. Only a subset ofthe population has had entrepreneurialconjectures in response to the development of this technology. Some people still do not know what the Internetis or that profitable opportunities exist to exploit it.
Cognitive properties. Since the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities is not an optimization process by which people make mechanical calculations in response to a given a set of alternatives imposed upon them (Baumol, 1993), people mustbe able to identifynew means-ends relationships that are generated by a given change in order to discover entrepreneurial opportunities.Even ifa person possesses the prior informationnecessary to discover an opportunity,he or she may fail to do so because of an inability to see new means-ends relationships.
Unfortunatelyv,isualizing these relationships is difficultR.osenberg (1994)points out thathistory is rifewith examples in which inventors failed to see commercial opportunities (new meansends relationships) thatresulted fromthe inven tion of important technologies-from the telegraph to the laser.
Priorresearch has shown that people differin their ability to identifysuch relationships. For example, research in the field of cognitive science has shown that people vary in theirabilities to combine existing concepts and information into new ideas (see Ward, Smith, & Vaid, 1997,forseveral review articles). Recently,a few researchers have begun to evaluate empirically the role that cognitive properties play in the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities (see Busenitz & Barney, 1996; Kaish & Gilad, 1991; Shaver & Scott, 1991).For example, Sarasvathy, Simon, and Lave (1998)have shown thatsuccessfulentrepreneurssee opportunitiesin situations in which otherpeople tend to see risks,whereas Baron (in press) has found that entrepreneurs may be more likely than other persons to discover opportunitiesbecause theyare less likely to engage in counterfactual thinking (i.e., less likely to invest time and effortimaging what "might have been" in a given situation), less likely to experience regretover missed opportunities, and are less susceptible to inaction inertia.

The Decision to Exploit Entrepreneurial Opportunities  Although the discovery of an opportunityis a necessary condition forentrepreneurship,it is not sufficient.Subsequent to the discovery ofan opportunity,a potential entrepreneurmust decide to exploit the opportunity.We do not have precise figures on the aborting of discovered opportunities,but we do know that not all discovered opportunities are brought to fruition.
Why, when, and how do some people and not others exploit the opportunities that they discover? The answer again appears to be a functionofthe jointcharacteristics ofthe opportunity and the nature ofthe individual (Venkataraman, 1997).
Nature of the opportunity.The characteristics of opportunities themselves influence the willingness ofpeople to exploit them.Entrepreneurial opportunities vary on several dimensions, which influences their expected value. For example, a cure forlung cancer has greater expected value than does a solution to students' need forsnacks at a local high school. The exploitation of an entrepreneurial opportunityre quires the entrepreneur to believe that the expected value ofthe entrepreneurialprofitwill be large enough to compensate forthe opportunity cost of other alternatives (including the loss of leisure), the lack ofliquidity ofthe investmentof time and money, and a premium for bearing uncertainty(Kirzner,1973;Schumpeter, 1934).
To date, research has shown that,on average, entrepreneurs exploit opportunities having higher expected value. In particular, exploitation is more common when expected demand is large (Schmookler, 1966; Schumpeter, 1934),industryprofitmargins are high (Dunne, Roberts, & Samuelson, 1988),the technology life cycle is young (Utterback,1994),the density of competition in a particular opportunityspace is neither too low nor too high (Hannan & Freeman, 1984), the cost ofcapital is low (Shane, 1996),and population-level learning from other entrants is available (Aldrich & Wiedenmeyer, 1993).
Individual differences.Not all potential entrepreneurs will exploit opportunities with the same expected value. The decision to exploit an opportunityinvolves weighing the value of the opportunityagainst the costs to generate that value and the costs to generate value in other ways. Thus, people consider the opportunity cost ofpursuing alternative activities in making the decision whetheror not to exploit opportunities and pursue opportunitieswhen theiropportunitycost is lower (Amit,Mueller, & Cockburn, 1995; Reynolds, 1987). In addition, people consider theircosts forobtaining the resources necessary to exploit the opportunity.For example, Evans and Leighton (1991) showed that the exploitation of opportunities is more common when people have greater financial capital.
Similarly, Aldrich and Zimmer (1986) reviewed research findings that showed that strongersocial ties to resource providers facilitate the acquisition of resources and enhance the probability of opportunityexploitation. Furthermore, Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg (1989) found that people are more likely to exploit opportunitiesif they have developed useful informationforentrepreneurshipfromtheirprevious employment, presumably because such informationreduces the cost of opportunityexploitation. Finally, the transferabilityof informationfromthe priorexperience to the opportunity(Cooper et al., 1989), as well as prior entrepreneurial experience (Carroll & Mosakowski, 1987), increases the  probability of exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunitybecause learning reduces its cost.
The decision to exploit an entrepreneurialopportunityis also influenced by individual differences in perceptions. The creation of new products and markets involves downside risk, because time, effort,and money must be invested before the distributionof the returns is known (Knight,1921;Venkataraman; 1997).Several researchers have argued that individual differences in the willingness to bear this risk influence the decision to exploit entrepreneurial opportunities(Khilstrom& Laffont,1979;Knight, 1921).For example, people who exploit opportunities tend to frameinformationmore positively and then respond to these positive perceptions (Palich & Bagby, 1995).
The decision to exploit entrepreneurialopportunities is also influenced by individual differences in optimism. People who exploit opportunities typically perceive their chances of success as much higher than they really areand much higher than those of others in their industry (Cooper, Woo, & Dunkelberg, 1988).
Moreover,when these people create new firms, theyoftenenter industries in which scale economies play an importantrole at less than minimum efficientscale (Audretsch, 1991),and they enter industries at rates exceeding the equilibrium number of firms(Gort & Klepper, 1982).4 However, in most industries,at most points in time,mostnew firmsfail (Dunne et al., 1988),and few firmsever displace incumbents (Audretsch, 1991),suggesting thatpeople who exploit opportunities,on average, are overlyoptimisticabout the value ofthe opportunitiestheydiscover. This overoptimism motivates the exploitation of opportunityby limiting information,stimulating rosy forecasts of the future (Kahneman & Lovallo, 1994), triggering the search for relatively small amounts of information(Kaish & Gilad, 1991),and leading people to act firstand analyze later (Busenitz & Barney, 1997).
Other individual differences may be important in explaining the willingness to exploit opportunities.Researchers have argued that people with greater self-efficacyand more internal locus ofcontrolare more likely to exploit opportunities,because exploitation requires people to  4The informationsignals generated by the entrepreneurial process are weak.

act in the face of skepticism of others (Chen, Greene, & Crick, 1998).Similarly,opportunityexploitation involves ambiguity, and people who have a greater tolerance forambiguity may be more likely to exploit opportunities (Begley & Boyd, 1987).Finally, the exploitation of opportunity is a setting in which people can achieve, providing a valuable cue forthose who possess a high need forachievement (McClelland, 1961).
Consequently, those who are high in need for achievement may be more likely than other members of society to exploit opportunities.
Readers should note that the attributes that increase the probability ofopportunityexploitation do not necessarily increase the probability ofsuccess. For example, overoptimismmightbe associated with a higher probability of both exploitation and failure. Of the population ofindividuals who discover opportunities in a given industry,those who are pessimistic may choose not to exploit discovered opportunities because they more accurately estimate what it will take to compete and how many otherpeople will try to do similar things. Overoptimistic individuals do not stop themselves fromexploiting these opportunities, because their overoptimism limits informationand motivates rosy forecasts of the future.

Anothercritical question concerns how the exploitation ofentrepreneurial opportunitiesis organized in the economy. Two major institutional arrangements for the exploitation of these opportunities exist-the creation of new firms (hierarchies) and the sale ofopportunitiesto existing firms (markets)-but the common assumption is that most entrepreneurial activity occurs throughde novo startups. However, people within organizations who discover opportunities sometimes pursue those opportunities on behalf oftheirexisting organizations and sometimes establish new organizations, whereas independent actors sometimes sell their opportunities to existing organizations and sometimes establish new organizations to pursue the opportunities.
Research shows that the choice of mode depends on the nature of the industrial organization,the opportunity,and the appropriability regime. Research in industrial organization has  shown that entrepreneurship is less likely to take the formof de novo startups when capital market imperfectionsmake it difficultforindependent entrepreneursto secure financing (Cohen & Levin, 1989). Entrepreneurship is more likely when the pursuit of entrepreneurial opportunityrequires the effortof individuals who lack incentives to do so in large organizations; when scale economies, firstmover advantages, and learning curves do not provide advantages to existing firms (Cohen & Levin, 1989); and when industries have low barriers to entry(Acs & Audretsch, 1987). Research on the appropriability of informationhas shown that entrepreneurship is more likely to take the formof de novo startups when informationcannot be protected well by intellectual propertylaws, inhibiting the sale of entrepreneurial opportunities (Cohen & Levin, 1989). Finally, research on the nature ofopportunitieshas shown thatentrepreneurship is more likely to take the formof de novo startups when opportunities are more uncertain (Casson, 1982), when opportunities do not require complementaryassets (Teece, 1986), and when opportunities destroy competence (Tushman & Anderson, 1986).

Entrepreneurship is an important and relevant field of study. Although those in the field face many difficult questions, we have presented a frameworkforexploring them.We recognize thatwe may have offeredsome uncertain assumptions, potentially flawed logical arguments,or have made statements thatwill prove, ultimately,to be inconsistentwithdata yetto be collected. Nevertheless, this framework provides a starting point. Since it incorporates informationgained frommany disciplinary vantage points and explored through many differentmethodologies, we hope that it will prod scholars frommany differentfields to join us in the quest to create a systematic body of information about entrepreneurship. Many skeptics claim thatthe creation ofsuch a body of theoryand the subsequent assembly of empirical support forit are impossible. We hope that other scholars will join our effortto prove those skeptics wrong.

Scott Shane is associate professorof entrepreneurshipin the RobertH. Smith School of Business and directorof research at the Dingman Center forEntrepreneurshipat the UniversityofMaryland. He received his Ph.D. fromthe UniversityofPennsylvania.
His currentresearch focuses on entrepreneurshipin high-technologysettings.

S. Venkataraman is the Samuel L. Slover Associate ProfessorofBusiness Administrationand directorofresearch at the BattenCenter forEntrepreneurialLeadership in the Darden Graduate School of Business Administrationat the UniversityofVirginia. He received his Ph.D. fromthe Universityof Minnesota. His currentresearch focuses on entrepreneurshiptheory.