Literary studies about the nineteenth-century British novel are often concerned with the nature of the community that surrounds the protagonist.
Some theorists have suggested a relationship between the size of a community and the amount of dialogue that occurs, positing that “face to face time” diminishes as the number of characters in the novel grows. Others suggest that as the social setting becomes more urbanized, the quality of dialogue also changes, with more interactions occurring in rural communities than urban communities.
Such claims have typically been made, however, on the basis of a few novels that are studied in depth. In this paper, we aim to determine whether an automated study of a much larger sample of nineteenth century novels supports these claims.
The research presented here is concerned with the extraction of social networks from literature.

We present a method to automatically construct a network based on dialogue interactions between characters in a novel. Our approach includes components for ﬁnding instances of quoted speech, attributing each quote to a character, and identifying when certain characters are in conversation. We then construct a network where characters are vertices and edges signify an amount of bilateral conversation between those characters, with edge weights corresponding to the frequency and length of their exchanges. In contrast to previous approaches to social network construction, ours relies on a novel combination of patternbased detection, statistical methods, and adaptation of standard natural language tools for the literary genre. We carried out this work on a corpus of 60 nineteenth-century novels and serials, including 31 authors such as Dickens, Austen and Conan Doyle.
In order to evaluate the literary claims in question, we compute various characteristics of the dialogue-based social network and stratify these results by categories such as the novel’s setting.
For example, the density of the network provides evidence about the cohesion of a large or small community, and cliques may indicate a social fragmentation. Our results surprisingly provide evidence that the majority of novels in this time period do not ﬁt the suggestions provided by literary scholars, and we suggest an alternative explanation for our observations of differences across novels.
In the following sections, we survey related work on social networks as well as computational studies of literature. We then present the literary hypotheses in more detail. We describe the methods we use to extract dialogue and construct conversational networks, along with our approach to analyzing their characteristics. After we present the statistical results, we analyze their signiﬁcance from a literary perspective.

Computer-assisted literary analysis has typically occurred at the word level. This level of granularity lends itself to studies of authorial style based on patterns of word use (Burrows, 2004), and researchers have successfully “outed” the writers of anonymous texts by comparing their style to that of a corpus of known authors (Mostellar and Wallace, 1984). Determining instances of “text reuse,” a type of paraphrasing, is also a form of analysis at the lexical level, and it has recently been used to validate theories about the lineage of ancient texts (Lee, 2007).
Analysis of literature using more semanticallyoriented techniques has been rare, most likely because of the difﬁculty in automatically determining meaningful interpretations. Some exceptions include recent work on learning common event sequences in news stories (Chambers and Jurafsky, 2008), an approach based on statistical methods, and the development of an event calculus for characterizing stories written by children (Halpin et al., 2004), a knowledge-based strategy. On the other hand, literary theorists, linguists and others have long developed symbolic but non-computational models for novels. For example, Moretti (2005) has graphically mapped out texts according to geography, social connections and other variables.
While researchers have not attempted the automatic construction of social networks representing connections between characters in a corpus of novels, the ACE program has involved entity and relation extraction in unstructured text (Doddington et al., 2004). Other recent work in social network construction has explored the use of structured data such as email headers (McCallum et al., 2007) and U.S. Senate bill cosponsorship (Cho and Fowler, 2010). In an analysis of discussion forums, Gruzd and Haythornthwaite (2008) explored the use of message text as well as posting data to infer who is talking to whom. In this paper, we also explore how to build a network based on conversational interaction, but we analyze the reported dialogue found in novels to determine the links. The kinds of language that is used to signal such information is quite different in the two media. In discussion forums, people tend to use addresses such as “Hi Tom,” while in novels, a system must determine both the speaker of a quotation and then the intended recipient of the dialogue act. This is a signiﬁcantly different problem.

It is commonly held that the novel is a literary form which tries to produce an accurate representation of the social world. Within literary studies, the recurring problem is how that representation is achieved. Theories about the relation between novelistic form (the workings of plot, characters, and dialogue, to take the most basic categories) and changes to real-world social milieux abound. Many of these theories center on nineteenth-century European ﬁction; innovations in novelistic form during this period, as well as the rapid social changes brought about by revolution, industrialization, and transport development, have traditionally been linked. These theories, however, have used only a select few representative novels as proof. By using statistical methods of analysis, it is possible to move beyond this small corpus of proof texts. We believe these methods are essential to testing the validity of some core theories about social interaction and their representation in literary genres like the novel.
Major versions of the theories about the social worlds of nineteenth-century ﬁction tend to center on characters, in two speciﬁc ways: how many characters novels tend to have, and how those characters interact with one another. These two “formal” facts about novels are usually explained with reference to a novel’s setting. From the inﬂuential work of the Russian critic Mikhail Bakhtin to the present, a consensus emerged that as novels are increasingly set in urban areas, the number of characters and the quality of their interaction change to suit the setting. Bakhtin’s term for this causal relationship was chronotope: the “intrinsic interconnectedness of temporal and spatial relationships that are artistically expressed in literature,” in which “space becomes charged and responsive to movements of time, plot, and history” (Bakhtin, 1981, 84). In Bakhtin’s analysis, different spaces have different social and emotional potentialities, which in turn affect the most basic aspects of a novel’s aesthetic technique.
After Bakhtin’s invention of the chronotope, much literary criticism and theory devoted itself to ﬁlling in, or describing, the qualities of speciﬁc chronotopes, particularly those of the village or rural environment and the city or urban environment. Following a suggestion of Bakhtin’s that the population of village or rural ﬁctions is modeled on the world of the family, made up of  Author/Title/Year Ainsworth, Jack Sheppard (1839) Austen, Emma (1815) Austen, Mansﬁeld Park (1814) Austen, Persuasion (1817) Austen, Pride and Prejudice (1813) Braddon, Lady Audley’s Secret (1862) Braddon, Aurora Floyd (1863) Bronte¨, Anne, The Tenant of Wildfell Hall (1848) Bronte¨, Charlotte, Jane Eyre (1847) Bronte¨, Charlotte, Villette (1853) Bronte¨, Emily, Wuthering Heights (1847) Bulwer-Lytton, Paul Clifford (1830) Collins, The Moonstone (1868) Collins, The Woman in White (1859)  Conan Doyle, The Sign of the Four (1890) Conan Doyle, A Study in Scarlet (1887) Dickens, Bleak House (1852) Dickens, David Copperﬁeld (1849) Dickens, Little Dorrit (1855) Dickens, Oliver Twist (1837)  Dickens, The Pickwick Papers (1836) Disraeli, Sybil, or the Two Nations (1845)  Edgeworth, Belinda (1801) Edgeworth, Castle Rackrent (1800) Eliot, Adam Bede (1859) Eliot, Daniel Deronda (1876) Eliot, Middlemarch (1871) Eliot, The Mill on the Floss (1860) Galt, Annals of the Parish (1821) Gaskell, Mary Barton (1848)  Persp. Setting 3rd urban 3rd rural 3rd rural 3rd rural 3rd rural 3rd mixed 3rd rural 1st rural  1st urban 1st urban mixed urban 1st mixed 3rd urban 3rd urban  Author/Title/Year Gaskell, North and South (1854) Gissing, In the Year of Jubilee (1894) Gissing, New Grub Street (1891) Hardy, Jude the Obscure (1894) Hardy, The Return of the Native (1878) Hardy, Tess of the d’Ubervilles (1891) Hughes, Tom Brown’s School Days (1857) James, The Portrait of a Lady (1881)  an intimately related set of characters, many crit to describe this world, in which face-to-face rela tions of a restricted set of characters are the pri seen in gardens, or at the theater; future friends,  Bakhtin in his logic), social interactions of differ setting produces different forms of social interac of characters, and more interactions, although less  resentativeness, particularly in the following cate actual conversation; as literary critic Terry Eagle cal authors of the period), historical (novels from each decade), generic (from the major sub-genres of nineteenth-century ﬁction), sociological (set in rural, urban, and mixed locales), and technical (narrated in ﬁrst-person and third-person form).
The novels, as well as important metadata we assigned to them (the perspective and setting), are shown in Table 1. We deﬁne urban to mean set in a metropolitan zone, characterized by multiple forms of labor (not just agricultural). Here, social relations are largely ﬁnancial or commercial in character. We conversely deﬁne rural to describe texts that are set in a country or village zone, where agriculture is the primary activity, and where land-owning, non-productive, rentcollecting gentry are socially predominant. Social relations here are still modeled on feudalism (relations of peasant-lord loyalty and family tie) rather than the commercial cash nexus. We also explored other properties of the texts, such as literary genre, but focus on the results found with setting and perspective. We obtained electronic encodings of the texts from Project Gutenberg. All told, these texts total more than 10 million words.
We assembled this representative corpus in order to test two hypotheses, which are derived from the aforementioned theories:  1. That there is an inverse correlation between the amount of dialogue in a novel and the number of characters in that novel. One basic, shared assumption of these theorists is that as the network of characters expands– as, in Moretti’s words, a quantitative change becomes qualitative– the importance, and in fact amount, of dialogue decreases. With a method for extracting conversation from a large corpus of texts, it is possible to test this hypothesis against a wide range of data.

2. That a signiﬁcant difference in the nineteenth-century novel’s representation of social interaction is geographical: novels set in urban environments depict a complex but loose social network, in which numerous characters share little conversational interaction, while novels set in rural environments inhabit more tightly bound social networks, with fewer characters sharing much more conversational interaction. This hypothesis is based on the contrast between Williams’s rural “knowable communities” and the  sprawling, populous, less conversational urban ﬁctions or Moretti’s and Eagleton’s analyses. If true, it would suggest that the inverse relationship of hypothesis #1 (more characters means less conversation) can be correlated to, and perhaps even caused by, the geography of a novel’s setting. The claims about novelistic geography and social interaction have usually been based on comparisons of a selected few novelists (Jane Austen and Charles Dickens preeminently).
Do they remain valid when tested against a larger corpus?  In order to test these hypotheses, we developed a novel approach to extracting social networks from literary texts themselves, building on existing analysis tools. We deﬁned “social network” as “conversational network” for purposes of evaluating these literary theories. In a conversational network, vertices represent characters (assumed to be named entities) and edges indicate at least one instance of dialogue interaction between two characters over the course of the novel. The weight of each edge is proportional to the amount of interaction. We deﬁne a conversation as a continuous span of narrative time featuring a set of characters in which the following conditions are met:  1. The characters are in the same place at the same time;  3. The characters are mutually aware of each other and each character’s speech is mutually intended for the other to hear.

In the following subsections, we discuss the methods we devised for the three problems in text processing invoked by this approach: identifying the characters present in a literary text, assigning a “speaker” (if any) to each instance of quoted speech from among those characters, and constructing a social network by detecting conversations from the set of dialogue acts.

The ﬁrst challenge was to identify the candidate speakers by “chunking” names (such as Mr.
Holmes) from the text. We processed each novel  with the Stanford NER tagger (Finkel et al., 2005) and extracted noun phrases that were categorized as persons or organizations. We then clustered the noun phrases into coreferents for the same entity (person or organization). The clustering process is as follows:  1. For each named entity, we generate variations on the name that we would expect to see in a coreferent. Each variation omits certain parts of multi-word names, respecting titles and ﬁrst/last name distinctions, similar to work by Davis et al. (2003). For example, Mr. Sherlock Holmes may refer to the same character as Mr. Holmes, Sherlock Holmes, Sherlock and Holmes.

2. For each named entity, we compile a list of other named entities that may be coreferents, either because they are identical or because one is an expected variation on the other.

3. We then match each named entity to the most recent of its possible coreferents. In aggregate, this creates a cluster of mentions for each character.

We also pre-processed the texts to normalize formatting, detect headings and chapter breaks, remove metadata, and identify likely instances of quoted speech (that is, mark up spans of text that fall between quotation marks, assumed to be a superset of the quoted speech present in the text).

In order to programmatically assign a speaker to each instance of quoted speech, we applied a highprecision subset of a general approach we describe elsewhere (Elson and McKeown, 2010). The ﬁrst step of this approach was to compile a separate training and testing corpus of literary texts from British, American and Russian authors of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The training corpus consisted of about 111,000 words including 3,176 instances of quoted speech. To obtain goldstandard annotations, we conducted an online survey via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk program. For each quote, we asked three annotators to independently choose a speaker from the list of contextual candidates– or, choose “spoken by an unlisted character” if the answer was not available, or “not spoken by any character” for non-dialogue cases such as sneer quotes.

We divided this corpus into training and testing sets, and used the training set to develop a categorizer that assigned one of ﬁve syntactic categories to each quote. For example, if a quote is followed by a verb that indicates verbal expression (such as “said”), and then a character mention, a category called Character trigram is assigned to the quote.
The ﬁfth category is a catch-all for quotes that do not fall into the other four. In many cases, the answer can be reliably determined based solely on its syntactic category. For instance, in the Character trigram category, the mentioned character is the quote’s speaker in 99% of both the training and testing sets.
In all, we were able to determine the speaker of 57% of the testing set with 96% accuracy just on the basis of syntactic categorization. This is the technique we used to construct our conversational networks. In another study, we applied machine learning tools to the data (one model for each syntactic category) and achieved an overall accuracy of 83% over the entire test set (Elson and McKeown, 2010). The other 43% of quotes are left here as “unknown” speakers; however, in the present study, we are interested in conversations rather than individual quotes. Each conversation is likely to consist of multiple quotes by each speaker, increasing the chances of detecting the interaction. Moreover, this design decision emphasizes the precision of the social networks over their recall. This tilts “in favor” of hypothesis #1 (that there are fewer social interactions in larger communities); however, we shall see that despite the emphasis of precision over recall, we identify a sufﬁcient mass of interactions in the texts to constitute evidence against this hypothesis.

We then applied the results from our character identiﬁcation and quoted speech attribution methods toward the construction of conversational networks from literature. We derived one network from each text in our corpus.
We ﬁrst assigned vertices to character entities that are mentioned repeatedly throughout the novel. Coreferents for the same name (such as Mr. Darcy and Darcy) were grouped into the same vertex. We found that a network that included incidental or single-mention named entities became too noisy to function effectively, so we ﬁltered out the entities that are mentioned fewer than three  times in the novel or are responsible for less than 1% of the named entity mentions in the novel.
We assigned undirected edges between vertices that represent adjacency in quoted speech fragments. Speciﬁcally, we set the weight of each undirected edge between two character vertices to the total length, in words, of all quotes that either character speaks from among all pairs of adjacent quotes in which they both speak– implying face to face conversation. We empirically determined that the most accurate deﬁnition of “adjacency” is one where the two characters’ quotes fall within 300 words of one another with no attributed quotes in between. When such an adjacency is found, the length of the quote is added to the edge weight, under the hypothesis that the signiﬁcance of the relationship between two individuals is proportional to the length of the dialogue that they exchange.
Finally, we normalized each edge’s weight by the length of the novel.
An example network, automatically constructed in this manner from Jane Austen’s Mansﬁeld Park, is shown in Figure 1. The width of each vertex is drawn to be proportional to the character’s share of all the named entity mentions in the book (so that protagonists, who are mentioned frequently, appear in larger ovals). The width of each edge is drawn to be proportional to its weight (total conversation length).
We also experimented with two alternate methods for identifying edges, for purposes of a baseline:  1. The “correlation” method divides the text into 10-paragraph segments and counts the number of mentions of each character in each segment (excluding mentions inside quoted speech). It then computes the Pearson product-moment correlation coefﬁcient for the distributions of mentions for each pair of characters. These coefﬁcients are used for the edge weights. Characters that tend to appear together in the same areas of the novel are taken to be more socially connected, and have a higher edge weight.

2. The “spoken mention” method counts occurrences when one character refers to another in his or her quoted speech. These counts, normalized by the length of the text, are used as edge weights. The intuition is that characters who refer to one another are likely to be in conversation.

To check the accuracy of our method for extracting conversational networks, we conducted an evaluation involving four of the novels (The Sign of the Four, Emma, David Copperﬁeld and The Portrait of a Lady). We did not use these texts when developing our method for identifying conversations.
For each book, we randomly selected 4-5 chapters from among those with signiﬁcant amounts of quoted speech, so that all excerpts from each novel amounted to at least 10,000 words. We then asked three annotators to identity all the conversations that occur in all 44,000 words. We requested that the annotators include both direct and indirect (unquoted) speech, and deﬁne “conversation” as in the beginning of Section 4, but exclude “retold” conversations (those that occur within other dialogue).
We processed the annotation results by breaking down each multi-way conversation into all of its unique two-character interactions (for example, a conversation between four people indicates six bilateral interactions). To calculate inter-annotator agreement, we ﬁrst compiled a list of all possible interactions between all characters in each text.
In this model, each annotator contributed a set of “yes” or “no” decisions, one for every character pair. We then applied the kappa measurement for agreement in a binary classiﬁcation problem (Co hen, 1960). In 95% of character pairs, annotators were unanimous, which is a high agreement of k = .82.
The precision and recall of our method for detecting conversations is shown in Table 2. Precision was .95; this indicates that we can be conﬁdent in the speciﬁcity of the conversational networks that we automatically construct. Recall was .51, indicating a sensitivity of slightly more than half. There were several reasons that we did not detect the missing links, including indirect speech, quotes attributed to anaphoras or coreferents, and “diffuse” conversations in which the characters do not speak in turn with one another.
To calculate precision and recall for the two baseline social networks, we set a threshold t to derive a binary prediction from the continuous edge weights. The precision and recall values shown for the baselines in Table 2 represent the highest performance we achieved by varying t between 0 and 1 (maximizing F-measure over t).
Both baselines performed signiﬁcantly worse in precision and F-measure than our quoted speech adjacency method for detecting conversations.

We extracted features from the conversational networks that emphasize the complexity of the social interactions found in each novel:  1. The number of characters and the number of speaking characters  2. The variance of the distribution of quoted speech (speciﬁcally, the proportion of quotes spoken by the n most frequent speakers, for 1 ≤ n ≤ 5)  3. The number of quotes, and proportion of words in the novel that are quoted speech  4. The number of 3-cliques and 4-cliques in the social network  where |Ev| is the number of edges incident on a vertex v, and |V | is the number of vertices. In other words, this determines the average number of characters connected to each character in the conversational network (“with how many people on average does a character converse?”).

6. A variation on graph density that normalizes the average degree feature by the number of characters:  By dividing again by |V | − 1, we use this as a metric for the overall connectedness of the graph: “with what percent of the entire network (besides herself) does each character converse, on average?” The weight of the edge, as long as it is greater than 0, does not affect either the network’s average degree or graph density.

We derived results from the data in two ways.
First, we examined the strengths of the correlations between the features that we extracted (for example, between number of character vertices and the average degree of each vertex). We used Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefﬁcient in these calculations. Second, we compared the extracted features to the metadata we previously assigned to each text (e.g., urban vs. rural).
Hypothesis #1, which we described in Section 3, claims that there is an inverse correlation between the amount of dialogue in a nineteenthcentury novel and the number of characters in that novel. We did not ﬁnd this to be the case. Rather, we found a weak but positive correlation (r=.16) between the number of quotes in a novel and the number of characters (normalizing the quote count for text length). There was a stronger positive correlation (r=.50) between the number of unique speakers (those characters who speak at least once) and the normalized number of quotes, suggesting that larger networks have more conversations than smaller ones. But because the ﬁrst  correlation is weak, we investigated whether further analysis could identify other evidence that conﬁrms or contradicts the hypothesis.

Another way to interpret hypothesis #1 is that social networks with more characters tend to break apart and be less connected. However, we found the opposite to be true. The correlation between the number of characters in each graph and the average degree (number of conversation partners) for each character was a positive, moderately strong r=.42. This is not a given; a network can easily, for example, break into minimally connected or mutually exclusive subnetworks when more characters are involved. Instead, we found that networks tend to stay close-knit regardless of their size: even the density of the graph (the percentage of the community that each character talks to) grows with the total population size at r=.30. Moreover, as the population of speakers grows, the density is likely to increase at r=.49. A higher number of characters (speaking or non-speaking) is also correlated with a higher rate of 3-cliques per character (r=.38), as well as with a more balanced distribution of dialogue (the share of dialogue spoken by the top three speakers decreases at r=−.61).
This evidence suggests that in nineteenth-century British literature, it is the small communities, rather than the large ones, that tend to be disconnected.

Hypothesis #2, meanwhile, posited that a novel’s setting (urban or rural) would have an effect on the structure of its social network. After deﬁning “social network” as a conversational network, we did not ﬁnd this to be the case. Surprisingly, the numbers of characters and speakers found in the urban novel were not signiﬁcantly greater than those found in the rural novel. Moreover, each of the features we extracted, such as the rate of cliques, average degree, density, and rate of characters’ mentions of other characters, did not change in a statistically signiﬁcant manner between the two genres. For example, Figure 2 shows the mean over all texts of each network’s average degree, with conﬁdence intervals, separated by setting into urban and rural. The increase in degree seen in urban texts is not signiﬁcant.

Rather, the only type of metadata variable that did impact the average degree with any signiﬁcance was the text’s perspective. Figure 2 also separates texts into ﬁrst- and third-person tellings and shows the means and conﬁdence intervals for the  average degree measure. Stories told in the third person had much more connected networks than stories told in the ﬁrst person: not only did the average degree increase with statistical signiﬁcance (by the homoscedastic t-test to p < .005), so too did the graph density (p < .05) and the rate of 3-cliques per character ( p < .05).
We believe the reason for this can be intuited with a visual inspection of a ﬁrst-person graph.
Figure 3 shows the conversational network extracted for Collins’s The Woman in White, which is told in the ﬁrst person. Not surprisingly, the most oft-repeated named entity in the text is I, referring to the narrator. More surprising is the lack of conversation connections between the auxiliary characters. The story’s structure revolves around the narrator and each character is understood in terms of his or her relationship to the narrator. Private conversations between auxiliary characters would not include the narrator, and thus do not appear in a  ﬁrst-hand account. An “omniscient” third person narrator, by contrast, can eavesdrop on any pair of characters conversing. This highlights the importance of detecting reported and indirect speech in future work, as a ﬁrst-person narrator may hear about other connections without witnessing them.

Our data, therefore, markedly do not conﬁrm hypothesis #1. They also suggest, in relation to hypothesis #2 (also not conﬁrmed by the data), a strong reason why.
One of the basic assumptions behind hypothesis #2– that urban novels contain more characters, mirroring the masses of nineteenth-century cities– is not borne out by our data. Our results do, however, strongly correlate a point of view (thirdperson narration) with more frequently connected characters, implying tighter and more talkative social networks.
We would propose that this suggests that the form of a given novel– the standpoint of the narrative voice, whether the voice is “omniscient” or not– is far more determinative of the kind of social network described in the novel than where it is set or even the number of characters involved.
Whereas standard accounts of nineteenth-century ﬁction, following Bakhtin’s notion of the “chronotope,” emphasize the content of the novel as determinative (where it is set, whether the novel ﬁts within a genre of “village” or “urban” ﬁction), we have found that content to be surprisingly irrelevant to the shape of social networks within.
Bakhtin’s inﬂuential theory, and its detailed reworkings by Williams, Moretti, and others, suggests that as the novel becomes more urban, more centered in (and interested in) populous urban settings, the novel’s form changes to accommodate the looser, more populated, less conversational networks of city life. Our data suggests the opposite: that the “urban novel” is not as strongly distinctive a form as has been asserted, and that in fact it can look much like the village ﬁctions of the century, as long as the same method of narration is used.
This conclusion leads to some further considerations. We are suggesting that the important element of social networks in nineteenth-century ﬁction is not where the networks are set, but from what standpoint they are imagined or narrated.
Narrative voice, that is, trumps setting.

In this paper, we presented a method for characterizing a text of literary ﬁction by extracting the network of social conversations that occur between its characters. This allowed us to take a systematic and wide look at a large corpus of texts, an approach which complements the narrower and deeper analysis performed by literary scholars and can provide evidence for or against some of their claims. In particular, we described a high-precision method for detecting face-to-face conversations between two named characters in a novel, and showed that as the number of characters in a novel grows, so too do the cohesion, interconnectedness and balance of their social network. In addition, we showed that the form of the novel (ﬁrst- or third-person) is a stronger predictor of these features than the setting (urban or rural).
Our results thus far suggest further review of our methods, our corpus and our results for more insights into the social networks found in this and other genres of ﬁction.

This material is based on research supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under IIS-0935360. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the NSF.