Why do people get phished? Testing individual differences in phishing vulnerability within an integrated, information processing model  Phishing is an email based deception where a perpetrator (phisher) camouﬂages emails to appear as a legitimate request for personal and sensitive information (Bose et al. 2007; Bose et al. 2008a; Bose et al.
2008b) [8–10]. Phishers use social engineering techniques such as using the names of credible businesses (American Express, eBay), government institutions (Internal Revenue Service, Department of Motor Vehicles), or current events (political donations, Beijing Olympic tickets, aiding Katrina victims) in conjunction with statements invoking fear, threat, excitement, or urgency, to persuade people to respond (Wang et al.
2009) [45]. In the last few years such attacks have increased in frequency and sophistication. The antiphishing workgroup (2008) reports that for the year 2008, there were over 85,630 unique phishing reports with 81,215 new unique phishing sites. A recent Gartner report notes that nearly 11 million online adults – representing about 19% of those attacked – may have clicked on the link in a phishing attack email (Litan 2004) [34]. Because phishing scams are sent to thousands of customers, even a 2–3% success rate can be ﬁnancially costly. A study by Gartner group estimated the losses in 2003 to be $1.2B (Litan 2004) [34]. In  addition to the monetary impact, phishing is likely to erode consumer trust in online security and payment systems. This distrust increases consumer resistance towards online communication, and increases the cost of doing business online (Belanger et al. 2006; Belanger et al. 2002; Gupta et al. 2004; McNall et al. 2007) [6,7,23,37]. With the growing popularity of electronic commerce, researchers have estimated the losses to exceed US$1 trillion globally (Bose et al. 2008a) [8].
A growing body of research has begun to explore ways to shield individuals from getting phished. The overall body of work takes one of two approaches. One approach, emanating from the computer sciences, focuses on engineering technological ﬁxes that automatically detect phishing emails and either inhibit such emails from entering an individual's in-box (e.g., (Kamaraguru et al. 2006) [30] or alert individuals about the deception (Kamaraguru et al. 2006) [30].
While such research is noteworthy, past experience suggests that technology alone does not provide adequate protections especially because phishers tend to evolve with the technology and improve their baiting techniques. Some examples of this evolution are recent scams called spear phishing that target speciﬁc victims such as CEOs and high net worth individuals, and puddle phishing that target smaller regional bank and credit union customers. In such cases, the phisher creates sophisticated and personalized emails that overcome technology based screeners.
The other approach, taken by social scientists, is to study the individual or the potential victim and understand why they respond  to phishing emails. Here, some researchers focus on the elements of the email that communicate trust, credibility, and authenticity (e.g., (Jakobsson 2007) [27]. Others focus on the individual victims and how they process deceptive online information (e.g., (Grazioli 2004) [22].
Some others extend theories from consumer behavior, persuasion, and market research to understand why some individuals get victimized by social engineering threats (e.g., (Workman 2007) [46].
Each stream of research, however, focuses on a single set of causative factors while controlling for others. Missing from the literature is a single comprehensive model that simultaneously tests how individuals evaluate and process phishing emails, elements of the email that are attended to, individual level factors that manifest the cognitive evaluation process, and how this evaluation, in-turn, affects the individuals phishing susceptibility.
In the present study, by proposing an integrated information processing model of phishing susceptibility, we argue that contextual factors inﬂuence phishing susceptibility indirectly by inﬂuencing information processing activities. In other words, the inﬂuence of cognitive and information processing activities on phishing susceptibility are tempered by the individuals levels of motivation, their personality based beliefs, their prior knowledge, and their day-to-day experiences. Thus, the research model provides an overarching theoretically driven structure to compare and contrast the inﬂuence of the key factors thought to inﬂuence phishing susceptibility. The integrated model is tested using structural equation modeling on a sample of intended victims of an actual phishing email that occurred at a major university in northeast USA. This study was conducted to take advantage of a natural event where the phishing attacks were real, with the attacking e-mails crafted by attackers and targeted towards a general university population with a purpose to harvest university user account and password. The model is then validated using another sample of intended victims, thereby providing conﬁrmatory evidence of its conceptual usefulness.
The manuscript is organized as follows: The following section presents the theoretical approaches taken by prior research on phishing. Next we develop the research model. The third section details the methodology, measures and procedures used to test the model followed by the section that presents the results. The last section presents the discussion, conclusions and implications of this research to both practice and theory.

This research evaluates the decision making involved in processing deceptive phishing emails. As Downs et al. (2006a) [17] argue, if we want to develop tools that will be effective in combating phishing schemes, we ﬁrst must know how and why people fall for them. In this  section we summarize the recent publications that explore how individual online users process and detect phishing attacks (Table 1).
Prior literature that explores how individual online users detect phishing attacks has predominantly adopted descriptive analyses (Downs et al. 2006b; Jagatic et al. 2007a; Jakobsson et al. 2007; Karakasiliotis et al. 2006; Tsow et al. 2007) [18,25,31,44] with a few exceptions (Downs et al. 2007; Workman 2008) [19,47]. The majority of studies explore the general decision strategies that online users adopt in phishing detection (Downs et al. 2006a; Jakobsson et al.
2007; Tsow et al. 2007) [17,27,44]. These studies discuss the stimulus such as source of email, grammar and spelling, and email title. They however do not consider the potential roles of individual attributes (e.g., involvement, knowledge, and self-efﬁcacy) with respect to how they affect phishing detection. A few studies have started examining the direct impacts of individual attributes on phishing detection success. The attributes that have been explored include gender (Dhamija et al. 2006) [16], phishing knowledge (Dhamija et al. 2006; Downs et al. 2007) [16,19], sender familiarity (Jagatic et al. 2007a) [25] and personality traits (Workman 2008) [47].
While this emerging body of research has expanded our understanding of online deception, there remain a number of important questions and assumptions that are unanswered. First, much of this research assumes that phishing emails are processed peripherally. Yet, how peripheral information processing ultimately inﬂuences the individuals' susceptibility to phishing based deception remains unclear. Second, research on the structural elements of phishing emails has found that individuals focus more on certain elements of these emails. Jakobsson (2007) [26] found that when subjects were asked to identify deceptive elements of phishing emails, the most important aspect they noted was spelling, grammar, and design, followed by the source of the message (URL, reply-to address).
Follow-up research to-date has yet to pinpoint how these features interact with individual information processing goals or inﬂuence individual susceptibility. Finally, each study focuses on the direct effects of a different set of causative factors.
Further, the focus on one causative factor exclusively over another also ignores their combined effects (Barkhi 2002; Barkhi et al. 2007) [4,5]. It is possible, for instance, that some individuals, while they might have a personality that makes them susceptible to responding to phishing emails, are more involved in the processing of phishing emails and thereby better at detecting such attacks. It is also possible that some individuals elaborately process emails but do not have sufﬁcient domain-speciﬁc knowledge to make an informed decision about the email.
Combining different factors into a single model would, therefore, provide a comprehensive, clearer view of the phishing deception process. A combined model would not only allow us to account for the  mitigating role of various factors, but will also provide insights into the relative importance of each causative mechanism. Hence, in the current study we synthesize key elements from prior research and develop an integrated model that simultaneously evaluates the effects of personality based beliefs along with the mediating effects of cognitive and information processing factors on individual susceptibility to phishing based deception.

3. An integrated, information processing model of phishing vulnerability  Early psychology research demonstrated that individual decisionmaking, rather than follow a direct path from stimulus (S) to response (R), followed a more complex trajectory through interpretation (I) (Dewey 1896; Rogers 2003) [15,42]. In the scenario of interpersonal deception, the stimuli are the verbal and non-verbal cues that a deceiver presents to a receiver. While the deceiver may modify his/ her behavior in response to the receiver's suspicions, Buller and Burgoon's (Buller et al. 1996) [12] Interpersonal Deception Theory (IDT) argues that identifying the verbal and non-verbal leakage cues that deceivers display during the process of deception is the key to detecting deception. Different than interpersonal deception, a phishing attack involves no interpersonal interactions but uses an e-mail as a means to reach potential victims. The stimulus presented to a receiver in a phishing attack is the e-mail, and the leakage cues are the content and the layout of the e-mail.
Similar to IDT in many respects, the Theory of Deception (Johnson et al. 1992) [28] more narrowly focuses on the information processing (or interpretation) involved during deception detection. According to the theory, individuals recognize deception by noticing and interpreting the inconsistencies between the deceptive event and their past experiences. The process of recognizing deception is decomposed into four stages: activation, where targets pay attention to deceptive information and detect anomalies; deception hypothesis generation, where individuals use prior knowledge to generate interpretative hypothesis to explain the anomalies; hypothesis evaluation, where the hypothesis formed in the previous stage are compared against some criteria; and ﬁnally, a global assessment stage, where the information is combined to form a single, synthetic assessment of deceptiveness. The assessment of deceptiveness is subjective and signiﬁcantly relies on individual prior knowledge.
Another theory that has been extended to study the information processing (or interpretation) of the receiver is the Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) (Petty et al. 1986) [39]. Rooted in consumer behavioral theory, ELM was developed to explain how consumers respond and process stimuli such as persuasive advertising messages.
Consumers process messages in one of two ways: (i) the central route, involves a diligent consideration of information based on its merits and comparisons to prior beliefs; (ii) the peripheral route, is where the consumer does not consider all the pros and cons of the message, but instead focuses on simple cues in the persuasion context. The level of involvement, measuring the relevance of the message to the receiver, is a central concept in ELM and serves as a scope condition that deﬁnes the extent of cognitive and information processing resources an individual is willing to expend towards a decision (Petty et al. 1983) [40].
More recent research suggests that decision-making processes are better represented as O-S-I-R models, where O is an additional concept that represents the cultural, motivational, and personality characteristics that individuals bring to the situation that inﬂuence their interpretation of the stimulus and their ultimate response (Markus et al. 1985; McLeod et al. 1994) [35,36]. Thus the O-S-I-R perspective captures both the contextual and cognitive elements of the decision process and hence, provides the foundation for our  research model. The overall research model is built to explain the factors that best predict an individual's phishing susceptibility, our measurement for the response (R), operationalized as the likelihood to respond to phishing emails.
Our model focuses on four contextual factors: the individual's level of involvement (I), domain speciﬁc knowledge (I), technological efﬁcacy (I), and email load (O). These contextual factors cover individual situational factors (represented by O) as well as the motivational and experiential factors inﬂuencing phishing message processing and interpreting (represented by I). Based on research in mediated cognitions and learning from the news (Eveland et al. 2003) [20], the information processing activities are structured into two discrete sub-processes: attention to the stimulus and elaboration the message. Further, because prior research points to differing levels of attention to speciﬁc elements within phishing emails (Jakobsson 2007) [26], our research distinguishes between attention to email source, email title or subject line, grammar and spelling, and urgency cues (S). Unlike prior research that argues for direct effects of either contextual factors or information processing, the model articulated herein argues that contextual factors inﬂuence phishing susceptibility indirectly by inﬂuencing information processing activities. In other words, the inﬂuence of cognitive and information processing activities on phishing susceptibility are tempered by the individuals levels of motivation, their personality based beliefs, their prior knowledge, and their day-to-day experiences. Thus, the research model provides an overarching theoretically driven structure to compare and contrast the inﬂuence of the key factors thought to inﬂuence phishing susceptibility.
Table 2 summarizes the theory element we use in the model along with the source of theory.

The hypotheses suggested by the research model are detailed below in terms of the key constructs laid out in previous subsection.

3.2.1. Information processing activities Based on research in mediated cognitions and learning from the news (Eveland et al. 2003) [20], the information processing activities are structured into two discrete sub-processes: attention and elaboration.
Attention is the ﬁrst stage in information processing and indicates the amount of mental focus given to speciﬁc elements of an event or object (Eveland et al. 2003) [20]. The concept of activation in the Theory of Deception (TOD) is similar to the notion of attention, with one important difference. In TOD, the notion of activation consists of allocating attention to cues based on the presence of discrepancies between what is observed and what is expected (Grazioli 2004) [22].
This treatment in TOD obfuscates mere attention to speciﬁc aspects of an email with detection of discrepancy, which potentially requires more detailed evaluation. The present research model (See Fig. 1), therefore, is more consistent with mediated information processing  models in deﬁning and measuring attention merely in terms of whether or not an individual focuses on key elements of an email.
The model further distinguishes between the speciﬁc components of the phishing email that serve as stimuli. Recent qualitative experiments suggest that when comparing deceptive and authentic emails, individuals pay particular attention to the grammar and spelling used in the emails and the reply-to address or source of the email (Jakobsson 2007) [26]. Furthermore, because phishers utilize social engineering techniques to garner response, the research model tests the inﬂuence of two additional components: the title or subject line, and urgency cues in the phishing email. In phishing emails, the title serves as a lure, cueing individuals about the relevance of the message contained within the email. Urgency cues contained in the email invoke feelings of threat, fear, or scarcity, thereby attempting to short-circuit the evaluation process and elicit compliance.
The attention paid to each email component might have a distinctly different inﬂuence on the individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email. Because title and urgency cues are designed to elicit compliance, attention to these elements would potentially increase the individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email.
In contrast, source information, and grammar and spelling have the potential to reveal the authenticity of the email and thereby reduce the individual's likelihood to respond to the request. Hence:  H1a. The level of attention to the email's source will be negatively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to phishing emails.

H1b. The level of attention to the grammar and spelling in the email will be negatively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to phishing emails.

H1c. The level of attention to the urgency cues will be positively related to the likelihood to respond to phishing emails.

H1d. The level of attention to the subject line will be positively related to the likelihood to respond to phishing emails.

Attention to cues is a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition (Rigney 1978) [41] for detecting phishing based deception. In addition to paying attention to cues, individuals need to elaborate on the cues.

Elaboration is the process through which individuals make conscious connections between the cues they observe and their prior knowledge (Perse 1990) [38]. The theory of deception (Johnson et al. 1992) decomposes detection–deception into discrete stages of activation, hypothesis generation, evaluation, and global assessment. These events occur during the process of elaboration (Eveland et al. 2003) [20]. The model posits that the process of generating hypotheses, evaluating hypotheses, and realizing that cues are inconsistent with prior understanding is a detailed information processing task that entails a comparison of cues with domain speciﬁc knowledge stored in one's memory during the process of elaboration.
The inﬂuence of elaboration in deception detection is supported by prior phishing research, much of which assumes that phishing emails are peripherally processed (e.g., (Workman 2007) [46]. Peripheral information processing occurs because individuals make simple inferences about an event based on simple cues in the persuasion context (Petty et al. 1983) [40]. In contrast, central information processing occurs when individuals diligently consider the information cues through the process of elaboration. The treatment of elaboration as pivotal to deception detection is also consistent with other models of mediated information processing such as the cognitive mediation models (Eveland et al. 2003) [20]. Empirical tests of these models have shown that individuals who elaborate on cues are more likely to comprehend, learn, retain and subsequently recall the information than individuals who merely pay attention to them (Cialdini 2001; Eveland et al. 2003) [13,20]. Hence, we posit that individuals fall victim to phishing emails because they fail to elaborate on the cues contained in the email, thereby failing to make connections between what they see and the knowledge stored in their memory. This failure to connect makes them more likely to ignore anomalous information and thereby more susceptive to phishing based deception.

H2a–d. The level of attention given to speciﬁc elements of the email (source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, subject line) will be negatively related to the level of elaboration.

H3. Elaboration will be negatively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to phishing emails.

3.2.2. Involvement The concept of involvement is central to understanding individual information processing. Involvement is deﬁned as the perceived relevance of a particular message or event to an individual (Zaichkowsky 1985) [48]. Its inﬂuence on phishing susceptibility remains undetermined. Generally, information processing is more likely to occur when individuals ﬁnd the information relevant to their needs and are thereby motivated to consciously evaluate it. Hence, we include involvement as a central, contextual factor and expect level of involvement to be positively associated with attention to speciﬁc elements of phishing emails and their elaboration.

H4a–d. The level of involvement will be positively related to the level of attention given to speciﬁc elements of the email ((a) source, (b) grammar and spelling, (c) urgency cues, (d) subject line).

H5. The level of involvement will be positively related to the level of elaboration.
In addition to an indirect inﬂuence, the research model also argues for a direct inﬂuence of level of involvement on phishing susceptibility. The notion is that individuals are sometimes likely to respond to an email subconsciously because of habitual email use patterns (Gopal et al. 2001) [21]. Anecdotal evidence from interviews conducted by the research team with two victims of a recent phishing attack, shows that many subjects reported responding to the phishing email without consciously attending to them. This suggests that some responses to phishing emails might be habitual, without the active engagement of information processing resources.
A habit is an automatic pattern of response or behavior that follows a ﬁxed cognitive schema, triggered by an environmental stimulus and performed without active consideration (Bargh et al.
1994; LaRose et al. 2004) [3,32]. Emerging research suggests that a great deal of media consumption behavior might be habitual (Adams 2000; LaRose et al. 2003) [1,33]. Habitual behaviors are initially formed through active consideration, but through repetition, individuals become inattentive to the reasoning behind the media use.
Hence, the mind no longer devotes attention resources to evaluating the behavior, thereby freeing itself for important decisions (LaRose et al. 2004) [32]. Email use might be a classic case of habitual media use. Many individuals report checking emails every morning or every time they encounter a device that allows access to email. Hence, phishing email responses might be partially conditioned by similar habitual response patterns, where individuals automatically respond to relevant emails without actively attending to them. The issue, however, is one of measuring habit. Because habit is subconscious, measuring it activates information processing in the respondent and makes it a conscious behavior. Hence, in the present piece, we do not directly measure habit. Instead, we focus on the construct of involvement and use it as an indicator of relevance, which is a necessary condition for the activation of habitual information processing (LaRose et al. 2004) [32]. We posit that individuals habitually responding to emails with little active attention are much more likely to respond to emails that appear relevant. Therefore, we expect level of involvement to be directly related to the individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email.

H6. In addition to inﬂuencing attention and elaboration, the level of involvement will be positively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to a phishing email.

3.2.3. Email load An important variable, often overlooked in phishing research, is the number of emails an individual receives in a given day. The volume of emails an individual receives has two potential consequences from a phishing detection stand-point. First, a large volume of emails might reduce the individual's ability to pay attention to  speciﬁc elements of each email. Hence, larger email volumes could be negatively related to the level of attention paid to the speciﬁc elements of a phishing email. Second, a large volume of emails received might directly inﬂuence the likelihood to respond to a phishing email by resulting in individuals directly responding to email without consciously paying attention to the email.

H7. Email load will be negatively related to level of attention given to speciﬁc elements of the email (source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, subject line).

H8. Email load will be positively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to a phishing email.

3.2.4. Domain-speciﬁc knowledge Domain-speciﬁc knowledge subsumes experience, exposure, and learning within a single construct. Emerging research on online deception argues for increasing awareness, knowledge, and sensitivity training, as a solution to reducing individual phishing susceptibility (e.g., (Brios 2002) [11]. Consistent with these arguments, we expect increased domain speciﬁc knowledge to inﬂuence individual phishing susceptibility indirectly by inﬂuencing the individual's ability to effectively elaborate and ﬁnd anomalous or deceptive information.

H9. Domain speciﬁc knowledge will be positively related to elaboration.

3.2.5. Computer self-efﬁcacy In addition to domain speciﬁc knowledge, the model also includes computer self-efﬁcacy. Self-efﬁcacy is the belief in one's ability to organize and execute a particular course of action (Bandura 1986) [2].
From the present perspective the focus is on computer self-efﬁcacy, i.e., the beliefs in one's ability to use computing technology. To-date, the treatment of personality speciﬁc beliefs has focused on its direct effects on phishing susceptibility. In the present model, however, we argue for the position espoused by Socio Cognitive Theory (SCT) (Bandura 1986) [2], where self efﬁcacy is thought to regulate behaviors by inﬂuencing the expected outcomes from the behavior.
The comprehension of expected outcomes for a behavior, however, requires an in-depth assessment and processing of its potential.
Because elaboration is the stage in cognitive information processing where such detailed assessments are made, we expect self efﬁcacy to be positively associated with the degree of elaboration.

H10. Computer self-efﬁcacy will positively be related to elaboration.

In closing, the research model (Fig. 1) posits that individuals get phished primarily because they do not actively engage in elaborate processing of the deceptive elements of an email. Rather, individuals pay attention to speciﬁc elements and directly respond to the email primarily because of inadequate elaboration and because of habitual media use patterns conditioned by high information loads. The next section presents the research methodology.

The model was tested on a sample of actual intended victims of a series of phishing attacks. In the spring of 2008, email users at a major university in northeast USA were targets of two phishing attacks. The ﬁrst email was received by all university email users on February 28, 2008 at 2:57 pm. The email, purportedly from the university email team, notiﬁed users of a forthcoming site upgrade and asked users to verify their email account information. The title or subject line of the email read “UPGRADE YOUR EMAIL ACCOUNT NOW.” The text of the email asked users for their user name, password, date of birth, security question, and security answer. Further, the email warned users that  they would permanently lose their email account if they did not send this information within 7 days of receipt of the solicitation.
On March 4, 2008, at 8:26 pm another phishing attack took place.
This email, purportedly from the “Admin Help Desk,” used the pretext of upgrading the email database and email account center for soliciting account use information. The subject line of the email read “Dear University Email Account Owner,” while the body text began with the title “VERIFY YOUR UNIVERSITY EMAIL ACCOUNT NOW.” Using the threat of account closure, the email asked university email users to provide their email username, password, date of birth, and country.
Similar to the earlier attack, this email also warned users failing to update their account by responding to the email within 7 days.
The two phishing attacks provided an ideal opportunity for testing the research model. Within four weeks after the second attack, following IRB approval, the data collection effort began. This study was conducted to take advantage of a natural event where the phishing attacks were real with the attacking e-mails crafted by attackers and targeted towards a general university population.
In general phishing research is besotted by many adverse issues.
Reaching a sample of phishing victims in an external environment is often difﬁcult. The success rate of such attacks is relatively low, which makes it very difﬁcult to collect data from real victims even in a nation-wide phishing attack. So far no study, to our knowledge, has been able to access a sufﬁciently large number of victims to make meaningful inferences. Many times, individuals may not know that they have been phished. If they realize that they have been phished and report a complaint to an agency such as APWG or FBI, getting access to this population is often difﬁcult. In addition, depending on the time elapsed victims may not remember the facts related to the incident with precision or accuracy.
To carry out mock or simulated phishing attacks, i.e. conducting deceptive studies such as carrying out phishing attacks, in the academic environment is especially difﬁcult because of reasons that include getting approval from IT personnel to carry out such attacks, and the opinions of ethics board in such deceptive tactics. Other alternative often used is to carry out lab experiments which are often criticized for having bias due to the Hawthorne effects. In other instances researchers have noted criticism from the experiment participants displaying anger over the deceptive tactics used (Jagatic et al. 2007) [25]. This natural event allowed the research team to take advantage of an otherwise difﬁcult setting to mimic and reach the possible victims in a very narrow window of time by providing a unique opportunity to study phishing. When participating in the surveys, the respondents responded to natural events (i.e., the two phishing emails) that took place in their lives. We were therefore able to collect unbiased responses while avoiding Hawthorne effects which are likely to occur in lab experiments.
In order to capture reliable estimates from a large group of fairly homogenous targets of the phisher, the data collection effort focused on undergraduate students at this university rather than faculty, staff, and graduate students. The entire data were collected in less than two weeks, between April 22, 2008 and May 4, 2008.
Undergraduate students in the department of Communication and the Business School were contacted via email by their respective undergraduate student advisors. The email asked students to participate in a short web-survey about student email use. The link to the survey was embedded in the solicitation email. Students participating in the survey were given a chance to enter in a random drawing to win one from one hundred, $5 Starbucks gift cards.
Following the informed consent process, students were asked a series of questions about general email use. They were then randomly shown one of the two phishing emails. Respondents were next asked whether they recalled receiving the email, how likely they were to respond to the email, and whether they actually responded to the email. These questions were followed by a series of questions pertaining to measures from the research model. Next, respondents  were shown the other phishing email followed by the same set of questions. The randomization procedure ensured that roughly half of all respondents were presented one email ﬁrst followed by the other, while the order was reversed for the other half.
Overall, the data collection effort resulted in 325 completed responses. From these, 4 had responded to one of the emails, 4 responded to the other email; 1 respondent among these had responded to both phishing emails. Approximately 191 responses were from Communication undergraduates and the remaining 130 were Business majors in all departments. The average age of the respondent was 21 years (SD= 3.19) and 54% of the respondents were female.
Given the relatively large sample of intended victims (N = 321), a split-half procedure for model testing was employed following the suggestions of Joreskog et al. (1986) [29]. This is accomplished by randomly selecting half of the subjects for initial analysis and holding the second half back for a second round of conﬁrmatory model testing.
In the present study, the procedure resulted in two split-half samples with 161 and 160 respondents respectively.

For the most part, the current study used prior validated measures developed in the IS and communication literature. Table 3 details the measures used in the study along with their alpha reliabilities.

The research model was tested and reﬁned using AMOS 5 on the sample of 161 intended phishing victims. Goodness of ﬁt was estimated using a combination of four ﬁt indices (Holbert et al.
2002) [24]: chi-square (χ2), relative chi-square (χ2/df), CFI (comparative ﬁt index), NFI (normed ﬁt index), and RMSEA (root mean square error of approximation). CFI and NFI values range from 0 to 1, with 0.95 or higher indicating a good ﬁt between the observed data and the speciﬁed model; RMSEA of .05 or less indicates a close ﬁtting model (Joreskog et al. 1986) [29]. Table 4 presents the means and standard deviations of the measures.
The initial path model achieved a less than acceptable ﬁt: χ2 = 208.6, df = 17, p b .05, χ2/df = 18.57, CFI = 0.46, NFI = 0.49, and RMSEA = 0.28. Modiﬁcation indices suggested co-variances between the attention measures (source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, subject line), and paths from computer self efﬁcacy ➔ attention to title/subject line (MI = 7.19, Δ par = − 1.21), computer self efﬁcacy ➔ attention to source (MI = 10.39, Δ par = −2.96), and from domain speciﬁc knowledge ➔ attention to title/subject line (MI = 1.23, Δ par = 0.23), and domain speciﬁc knowledge ➔ attention to source (MI = 5.77, Δ par = 1.49). The re-speciﬁed model achieved an excellent ﬁt: χ2 = 12.28, df = 7, p = .09, χ2/df = 1.75, CFI = 0.99, NFI = 0.98, and a RMSEA = 0.04. All the standardized regression weights were less than +/−1 and standard errors were neither excessively high nor low, indicating that there was no multicollinearity in the data. The overall model predicted 31% of the cumulative attention paid to email elements (source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, subject line), and 23% of level of elaboration, and 48% of the individual's likelihood to respond to phishing email.
The ﬁnal model was validated and conﬁrmed using the second sample (N = 160). The test of the model resulted in an excellent ﬁt: χ2 = 16.05, df = 7, p = .03, χ2/df = 2.29, CFI = 0.99, NFI = 0.97, and a RMSEA = 0.04. In this test, the model predicted 22% of the cumulative attention paid to email elements (source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, subject line), and 22% of level of elaboration, and 46% of the individual's likelihood to respond to phishing email.
The tests of the hypotheses are summarized in Table 5.
Hypothesis 1a posited that attention to email source would be negatively related to individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email. In the validation sample, the path from email source attention  (scaled from 1 = none/not at all, i.e., no attention) to likelihood to respond (scaled 1 = not at all likely) was signiﬁcant (β = −0.27, c.r. = −2.47, p b .05). Hence, hypothesis 1a was supported by the data.
Hypothesis 1b posited that level of grammar and spelling attention would be negatively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email. In the validation sample, the path from grammar and spelling attention (scaled from 1 = none/not at all) to likelihood to respond (scaled 1 = not at all likely) was signiﬁcant (β = − 0.29, c.r. = −3.06, p b .05). Hence, hypothesis 1b was supported by the data.
Hypothesis 1c posited that the level of attention to urgency cues would be positively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email. The path from urgency attention (scaled from 1 = none/not at all) to likelihood to respond (scaled 1 = not at all likely) was signiﬁcant (β = 0.23, c.r. = 2.41, p b .05). Hence, hypothesis 1c was supported by the data.
Hypothesis 1d posited that the level of attention to the subject line would be positively related to the individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email. The path from subject line attention (scaled from 1 = none/not at all) to likelihood to respond (scaled 1 = not at all likely) was signiﬁcant (β = 0.26, c.r. = 2.52, p b .05). Hence, hypothesis 1d was supported by the data.
Hypothesis 2a–d posited that the level of attention given to the email's source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, and subject line, respectively, would be negatively related to the level of elaboration. In the validation sample, the paths from level of source attention (attention scaled from 1 = none/not at all or no attention) to elaboration (scaled 1 = strongly agree or high elaboration), grammar attention to elaboration, and subject-line attention to elaboration were each negative but not signiﬁcant. Only the path from attention to urgency  cues to elaboration achieved signiﬁcance (β = −0.23, c.r. = −2.40, p b .05). Hence, the data were in support of hypothesis 2d.
Hypothesis 3 posited that the level of elaboration would negatively inﬂuence the individual's likelihood to respond to the phishing email.
The path from elaboration (scaled 1 = strongly agree or high elaboration) to likelihood to respond (scaled 1 = not at all likely) was negative but not signiﬁcant (β = − 0.10, c.r. = − 1.21, p N .05).
Hence, the data were only in support of the direction of hypothesis 3.
Hypothesis 4a–d posited that the level of involvement would be positively related to the level of attention given to the email's source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, and subject line, respectively. In the validation sample, the path from involvement (scaled 1 = essential or central processing) to urgency attention (scaled from 1 = none/not at all, i.e., not much attention given) was signiﬁcant (β = –0.20, c.r. = –2.46, p b .05); individual paths from involvement to source attention, grammar and spelling, and subject line were negative but did not achieve acceptable signiﬁcance (p N .05). Hence, the data supported the direction of inﬂuence and partially supported the level of inﬂuence posited in hypothesis 4a–d.
Hypothesis 5 posited that the level of involvement would be positively related to elaboration. The path from level of involvement (scaled 1 = essential or central processing) to elaboration (scaled 1 = strongly agree, or high elaboration) in the research model was signiﬁcant (β = 0.20, c.r. = 2.59, p b .05). Hence, the data were in support of hypothesis 5.
Hypothesis 6 posited that level of involvement would positively and directly inﬂuence individuals' likelihood to respond a phishing email. After inﬂuencing attention and elaboration, in the validation sample, the direct path from involvement (scaled 1 = essential, i.e., high involvement) to likelihood to respond (scaled 1 = not at all likely to respond) was signiﬁcant (β = −0.60, c.r. = − 9.31 p b .05). Hence, the data were in support of hypothesis 6.
Hypothesis 7a–d posited that email load would be negatively related to the level of attention given to the email's source, grammar and spelling, urgency cues, and subject line, respectively. The paths from email load (ratio level measure) to attention (scaled from 1 =none/not at all) to source, grammar and spelling, subject line, and urgency cues were negative but did not achieve acceptable signiﬁcance (p N .05). Hence, the data supported the direction of inﬂuence but not the level of inﬂuence posited by hypothesis 7a–d, and, therefore, the hypothesis was rejected.
Hypothesis 8 posited that email load would be negatively related to likelihood to respond. In the validation sample, the direct path from email load (ratio level measure) to likelihood to respond (scaled 1 = not at all likely) was signiﬁcant (β = −0.23, c.r. = − 3.21, p b .05).
Hence, the data were in support of hypothesis 8.

Note. A hypothesis is considered supported only if both the samples yield consistent results; otherwise it is treated as partially supported.

Hypothesis 9 stated that domain speciﬁc knowledge would be positively related to level of elaboration. In the initial sample, the path from domain-speciﬁc knowledge (scaled 1 = none/not at all, 5 = very conﬁdent) to elaboration (scaled 1 = essential) was signiﬁcant (β = − 0.16, c.r. = − 2.05, p b .05). In the validation sample, however, the same path from domain-speciﬁc knowledge to elaboration was insigniﬁcant. Hence, hypothesis 9 was considered partially supported.
Hypothesis 10 posited that efﬁcacy would positively inﬂuence the level of elaboration. The direct path from computer self efﬁcacy (1 = strongly agree/very conﬁdent) to elaboration (scaled 1 = essential) was signiﬁcant (β = 0.17, c.r. = 1.83, p N .05). Hence, hypothesis 10 was not supported by the data.
In the ﬁnal research model, the modiﬁcation indices based additional paths from computer self-efﬁcacy to attention to source (β = − 0.17, c.r. = − 5.10, p b .05) and attention to subject line (β = − 0.28, c.r. = − 2.82, p b .05) were signiﬁcant. Again, the addition of paths from domain-speciﬁc knowledge to attention to subject line resulted in a non-signiﬁcant path from computer self efﬁcacy to title attention. Both paths, from computer self-efﬁcacy to source attention (β = − 0.19, c.r. = − 3.68, p b .05) and from domain speciﬁc knowledge to source attention (β = 0.17, c.r. = 2.71, p b .05), remained signiﬁcant.

This research developed and tested an integrated, information processing model of phishing susceptibility. Based on the O-S-I-R perspective, the model posited that contextual variables would inﬂuence individual phishing susceptibility, indirectly, by inﬂuencing cognitive and information processing activities. The model was ﬁrst reﬁned using a sample of intended victims and then empirically validated using another sample of intended victims of a recent phishing attack. Overall, the data were in support of the causative structure, theoretical propositions, and causal relationships suggested by the research model. The ﬁnal model achieved an excellent ﬁt and predicted close to 50% of the individuals' likelihood to respond to phishing emails.
The model introduced and tested the inﬂuence of four contextual variables: level of involvement, email load, domain speciﬁc knowledge, and computer self-efﬁcacy. The research was among the ﬁrst to test the inﬂuence of involvement in the phishing detection process.
Consistent with the research hypotheses, involvement positively inﬂuenced the level of attention and elaboration. While the inﬂuence of involvement on elaboration was signiﬁcant, its inﬂuence on attention was signiﬁcant only for urgency cues and non-signiﬁcant  for attention to source, grammar and spelling, and subject-line.
Phishers use urgency cues to communicate fear, threat, and scarcity (Workman 2007) [46]. Such information cues are known to garner higher amounts of information processing resources (Shah et al.
2004) [43]. The ﬁnding, therefore, suggests that in the presence of a relevant email, individuals focus disproportionately on urgency cues, often ignoring other elements of the email such as its source and the grammar and spelling used in the email. Since these other elements aid the detection of deception (Jakobsson 2007) [26], the lack of attention to these elements increases the individual's likelihood to be phished.
In the phishing context no research to-date has accounted for the inﬂuence of habitual media use patterns on individual phishing susceptibility. Because habitual media use results in inattentiveness and automatic responses to patterned stimuli (LaRose et al. 2004) [32], its inﬂuence was tested through the direct path from involvement to likelihood to respond. This direct relationship between involvement and phishing susceptibility was both strong and signiﬁcant. While the overall model predicted 46% of the variance in likelihood to respond, the model with complete mediation (where attention and elaboration completely mediated the inﬂuence of involvement) accounted for only 20% of the variance in likelihood to respond. This suggests that habitual media use patterns, where individuals inattentively respond to relevant emails, accounted for at least one half of the variance in phishing susceptibility. Hence, habitual patterns of email use were a major contributor to individual phishing susceptibility.
The model included another important, often overlooked variable: email load. The research posited that email load could foster inattentiveness and support habitual media use patterns, thereby directly inﬂuencing likelihood to respond. The results suggested that individuals were far more likely to respond to phishing emails in the presence of large email loads. This suggests that level of involvement, email load, and urgency cues in the email form a triad of important predictors of individual phishing susceptibility.
Based on SCT, the research posited that self efﬁcacy would inﬂuence individual likelihood to respond to phishing emails, indirectly by inﬂuencing elaboration. This relationship was not supported by the data. Further, the research examined the role of domain-speciﬁc knowledge. Knowledge allows for deception-detection by helping recognize the elements of the information that are discrepant during the process of elaboration. Hence, domain-speciﬁc knowledge was seen to directly inﬂuence elaboration. We suspect that the observed insigniﬁcancy of self efﬁcacy may be caused by the simultaneous presence of domain-speciﬁc knowledge in the research  model. When compared with self efﬁcacy, domain speciﬁc knowledge offers online users with more accuracy and conﬁdence in decision making. Therefore users may adopt domain knowledge and follow it in the engagement of elaboration. Furthermore, modiﬁcation indices suggested that knowledge also inﬂuenced the extent of attention given to the email's subject line and email's source. The role of individual selfefﬁcacy was universally diminished, except in determining the level of attention paid to email source, where self-efﬁcacy was slightly more inﬂuential.
Based on research on mediated cognitions, ELM, and the Theory of Deception, the research model structured the cognitive, information processing activities that lead to deception detection into two discrete sub processes: attention was the ﬁrst step, followed by elaboration.
Attention is a necessary condition for information processing and hence, the research posited that attention would inﬂuence the likelihood to respond to the email. Unlike prior research that treats attention as a single construct, the model distinguished between four cues that could attract individual attention: the subject line or title, email source, urgency cues, grammar and spelling. Attention to each of these email elements would potentially inﬂuence individuals differently. Urgency cues, because they are designed to invoke feelings of threat, would have the strongest inﬂuence and individuals focusing on such cues would be signiﬁcantly more likely to respond to the phishing email. Likewise, the title of email serves as a lure, invokes fear and urgency, and at other times, cues individuals about the email's relevance. Therefore, attention to urgency cues and the title or subject line increase the individuals' likelihood to comply and respond to the phishing email. In contrast, email source information would potentially reveal the legitimacy of the email. For instance, in the two phishing emails tested, the reply-to addresses were non-“.edu” extensions. Likewise, the grammar and spelling used in phishing emails have been shown to inﬂuence the detection of phishing based deception because often these emails are poorly worded and contain typographical errors (Jakobsson 2007) [26]. Hence, attention to email source and attention to grammar and spelling would decrease the likelihood to be phished.
The results show individuals' levels of attention to urgency cues and email subject-lines are signiﬁcantly more likely to trigger a response to phishing email, while their levels of attention to the email source and grammar and spellings used in the email are signiﬁcantly less likely to trigger a response. Further, since most phishing emails are processed peripherally (Workman 2007) [46], the model posited that these email cues would not be elaborated upon. The data, for the most part, supported this proposition. While attention to source, title and grammar/spelling did not inﬂuence elaboration, attention to urgency cues did signiﬁcantly inﬂuence elaboration. This suggests that similar to fear appeals, urgency cues garner higher amounts of information processing resources and trigger elaboration (Shah et al.
2004) [43]. Based on ELM, the research posited that elaboration would not be signiﬁcantly related to the individuals' likelihood to respond.
This was supported, suggesting that individuals made simple inferences about the email based on event based cues rather than diligently processing the information.
Overall, the ﬁndings suggest that individuals get phished for two main reasons. One reason is that they do not adequately process the information. Rather, they rely on simple cues, some of which have the potential to increase their susceptibility to phishing based deception.
Domain speciﬁc knowledge gained through education, awareness, or experience, therefore, has a limited effect because the application of knowledge requires elaboration. Among the cues used by phishers, the urgency cues are by-far the most virulent. Such cues engender a higher degree of information processing. As a result, other deceptive clues in the email's source or the grammar and spelling in the email do not receive much elaboration. This overall effect is further strengthened by the individuals' media use habits, which is the other main reason people get phished. Habitual patterns of media use, in the  presence of high levels of email load, tend to trigger automatic responses to relevant looking emails. That is, individuals exposed to relevant emails, with strongly worded urgency cues, in the presence of high email load, are signiﬁcantly more likely to be phished.
Together, relevance, urgency cues, and habitual media use patterns form a triad of inﬂuence and largely determine individuals' phishing susceptibility.

While the ﬁndings of the study sheds light on the process of phishing based deception, arguments could be made that the student sample used in the study was not representative of the general public.
Though students are not representative of the average consumer, they are especially relevant in the context of email based deception because they tend to engage in more online behaviors and conduct more online commercial transactions that the average consumer.
Apart from student samples, there are least three additional limitations of the study. First, the study tested a limited number of phishing emails. Both the emails tested were similar in the types of information they asked for and the level of threat they posed. Other emails, such as those asking for social security numbers, banking information, and posing direct ﬁnancial risks to the target, might result in increased deception. Moreover, differences in the quality of phishing emails might further heighten individual phishing susceptibility. This is a limitation of the email used rather than of the model and one would expect the activation of similar cognitive and behavioral variables, i.e., the model variables, when individuals fall victim to other phishing emails. Second, the study did not use a control condition. This was because it was difﬁcult, if not impossible, to apriori select a set of features that did or did not exist in an email and control for its effects. Third, stemming from the lack of a control group, it is difﬁcult to ascertain whether the effects found in the study are reﬂections of only phishing email processing or reﬂections of general email use behavior.
Most of these limitations can be overcome by future research.
Future research could create a compendium of cues in deceptive and regular emails. These could be used to create exemplars of emails that could be tested in experimental settings. Future research needs to also focus on ﬁndings ways to directly measure habitual media use. Given the importance of this construct and the difﬁculty in measuring it directly without inﬂuencing the user, a sound measure of habit strength would further improve our understanding of the phishing deception process. Also, given the impact that urgency cues have on phishing based deception, future research could vary the degree of urgency, the types of warnings, threats, and cues, and evaluate its effects on victims. Finally, future research needs to focus on actual victims of phishing emails. Finding actual victims is always hard because few databases, websites, and business provide this information to researchers. Even in the present study, the number of actual victims was too few to allow for any statistically valid conclusions. A study focusing on actual phishing victims would of enormous signiﬁcance because it would help validate the research model and further our understanding of phishing based deception.
The research is, however, noteworthy and contributes to our understanding of phishing based deception in the following ways.
First, earlier research on phishing has focused on single sets of causative factors and has extended process models such as the Theory of Deception to understand phishing based deception. The present research is the ﬁrst to integrate these different streams of research and test a variance based model of phishing susceptibility. Second, the model provides an overarching theoretical structure to understand the inﬂuence of and interrelationships between different causative mechanisms on phishing susceptibility. The model's theoretical structure is strongly supported by the data and its causative sequence accounted for close to 50% of the variance in individual phishing  susceptibility. Third, the model introduces and tests the inﬂuence of a number of important variables that has been ignored in online deception research. These include the inﬂuence of media habits, involvement, and email load along with the mitigating role of knowledge on self efﬁcacy beliefs, and of knowledge and self efﬁcacy on attention and elaboration. Finally, not only does the model provide insights into how individuals get phished, but it also provides a framework to test the inﬂuence of other variables. For instance, a researcher interested in studying the inﬂuence of an intervention, such as exposure to phishing related information on individual phishing susceptibility, could utilize the present model to better track its inﬂuence and causative sequence. Hence, the research makes a signiﬁcant contribution to the study of phishing.

The following are the immediate implications of the current study.
First, the inﬂuence of email load on likelihood to respond to phishing emails suggests that the more emails one receives, the more likely they are be deceived. The inﬂuence of load is further heightened when one not only receives but also responds to a large volume of emails.
This means that spam blockers are imperative at one end to reduce the number of unnecessary emails that individuals receive that could potentially clutter their information processing and concomitant judgment. At the other end, individuals need to be extra careful when utilizing a single email account to respond to all their emails. Instead, an effective strategy is to utilize different email accounts for different purposes. So, an email address used solely for banking and another for personal communication with family and friends, increases attention and reduces the likelihood of chance-deception because of clutter.
Another implication of the current study is that individuals are more likely to attend to emails from known rather than unknown entities. That is, a phishing email purportedly from Key Bank might have little effect on individuals who do not transact with Key Bank, but is likely to be clicked on (passive deception) or responded to (active deception) by individuals with existing relationships with Key Bank. Many more websites today require valid email addresses for login purposes; many banks and ﬁnancial institutions prefer to communicate exclusively via email. Hence, the more online relationships one maintains and the more they transact online, the more likely they are to fall victim to an email based scam.
A third, important implication of the current study is the lack of effect of technological efﬁcacy and prior experience on phishing susceptiveness. Individuals fall victim to phishing and other email based scams because of a lack of cognitive involvement rather than a lack of ability. This means that individuals who consider themselves to be technological sophisticated are just as likely to be phished as are individuals who are not as technically sophisticated. Moreover, because individuals who are technically sophisticated tend to maintain and engage in more online relationships and thereby receive and respond to more emails, such individuals are far more likely to be targeted.
A fourth implication is the inﬂuence of habitual media use.
Habitual media use is often ignored in most mass communication research. Patterns of habitual media use include ritualistic consumption practices such as checking a news website every morning or at different times during the day. Email use is a classic case of habitual media use. Individuals report that they habitually check emails at the beginning of the day; many individuals ritualistically check email throughout the day often at multiple locations (e.g., airport terminals, hospitals, and other public places). Devices such as Blackberry and iPhones have capitalized on this behavior and furthered the habit.
Such devices, however, also increase the likelihood of passive deception – where one inadvertently clicks on an embedded link within an email and gets phished.

Habitual email use is particularly dangerous because these consumption habits once established continue with little further cognitive involvement. Hence, individuals who ritualistic read emails tend to engage in little cognitive deliberation about the established behavior and therefore much more likely to ignore nuances in the email that might reveal the deception. Habitual media use patterns are further complicated by other activities that might distract information processing. For instance, habitual email reception on a Blackberry while consuming breakfast, responding to emails while watching the kids at home, or reading emails while watching TV, might result in reduced attention and increased susceptibility to email based scams.
Overall, the strategy, often espoused by researchers, is vigilance.
Vigilance is, however, a short term strategy, and it is difﬁcult to maintain a high state of alert at all times. Rather, strategies that create safer rituals might be sustainable over the long term. One such ritual should be to earmark a certain, separate time each day for reading and responding to personal emails. Using a different time to read email and a different time to respond to them, increases the cognitive effort exerted during the process. Another strategy would be to use multiple email addresses for speciﬁc purposes. An email account for banking, an email account for personal communication, and an email account for business, might be one way to reduce clutter and catch seemingly out-of-place emails. Many email providers such as Yahoo and Gmail provide for multiple emails and disposable addresses; other services such as MailExpire and Mailinator provide free, temporary email addresses for use in websites that require an email address for login.
Finally, individuals need to utilize spam blockers and other, widely available service based protections. Most of these blockers offer limited protection; many ﬂag legitimate emails as well as suspected deceivers; and as neural programs, most of these protections work best after a large scale invasion has occurred and the system has been updated. Hence, the ultimate arbiter of legitimacy remains the individual user. Creating safer rituals seems to be the most viable solution for increasing information processing and reducing the individuals' susceptiveness to online, email based deception.

Arun Vishwanath (Communication, SUNY at Buffalo) is Associate Professor at SUNY Buffalo's Department of Communication and an adjunct professor in the Department of Management Science and Systems. His research focuses on consumer behavior and it applies to technology adoption and technology mediated interactions. His present research focuses on consumer information processing and consumer sense making processes. Dr. Vishwanath has authored and presented close to two dozen papers in leading Communication and Information Science journals and conferences. He has received research funding from AHRQ (NIH) and from the NYS Sea Grant.

Tejaswini Herath is an Assistant Professor in the Faculty of Business at the Brock University, Canada. Previously she worked as a systems analyst and part-time lecturer at UNBC, Canada. Her research interests are in Information Assurance and include topics such as information security and privacy, diffusion of information assurance practices, economics of information security and risk management. Her work has been published in the Journal of Management Information Systems (JMIS) and International Journal of E-Government Research (IJEGR). In addition she has presented papers at leading conferences and contributed several book chapters.

Rui Chen is an Assistant Professor of Information Systems at Ball State University. His research interests are in the areas of information assurance, emergency management, coordination and collaboration, and information technology outsourcing. Some of his publications have appeared in Journal of the AIS, Communications of the ACM, and other journals. He is also a Microsoft Certiﬁed System Administrator (MCSE) and Database Administrator (MCDBA).

Jingguo Wang is an Assistant Professor of Information Systems. He graduated from SUNY-Buffalo. His work has been published in Information Systems Research, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (Part C), European Journal of Operational Research, and other journals, and received best paper awards at AMCIS and the International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection. His current research interests are in the areas of cybercrime and information security, information search, and decision making.

H. R. Rao (MIS, SUNY @Buffalo) graduated from Purdue. He has edited four books including “Information Assurance in Financial Services (Idea Group, 2007)”. He has authored or co-authored more than 150 technical papers, and has received best paper and best paper runner up awards at AMCIS and ICIS. He has received research funding from NSF and DoD. He was a Fulbright fellow in 2004. He is the recipient of the 2007 SUNY Chancellor's award for excellence.